Title: 2603.24369v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.24369v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 01:08:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
1

# Adaptive decision -making for stochastic service 

# network design 

Javier Durán -Micco a* , Bilge Atasoy a

> a

Maritime and Transport Technology (MTT), Mechanical Engineering (ME), Delft University of 

Technology/ Mekelweg 2, 2628CD, Delft, The Netherlands. 

*Corresponding author. Email: j.duranmicco@tudelft.nl .

# Keywords 

Freight transport planning, service network design, metaheuristics, simulation -based 

optimization , adaptive decision -making 

# Abstract 

This paper addresses the Service Network Design (SND) problem for a logistics service 

provider (LSP) operating in a multimodal freight transport network, considering uncertain travel 

times and limited truck fleet availability. A two -stage optimization approach is proposed, which 

combines metaheuristics, simulation and machine learning comp onents. This solution framework 

integrates tactical decisions , such as transport request acceptance and capacity booking for 

scheduled services , with operational decisions , including dynamic truck allocation, routing, and 

re -planning in response to disruptions. A simulated annealing (SA) metaheuristic is employed to 

solve the tactical problem, supported by a n adaptive surrogate model trained using a discrete -

event simulation model that captures operational complexities and cascading effects of uncertain 

travel times. The performance of the proposed method is evaluated using benchmark instances. 

First, the SA is tested on a deterministic version of the problem and compared to state -of -the -art 

results, demonstrating it can improve the solution quality and significantly reduce the 

computational time. Then, the proposed SA is applied to the more complex stochastic problem .

Compar ed to a benchmar k algorithm that executes a full simulation for each solution evaluation ,

the learning -based SA generates high quality solutions while significantly reducing computational 

effort, achieving only a 5% difference in objective function value while cutting computation time 

by up to 20 times. These results demonstrate the strong performance of the proposed algorithm 

in solving complex versions of the SND. Moreover, they highlight the effectiveness of integrating 

diverse modeling and optimization techniques, and the potential of such approaches to efficiently 

address freight transport planning challenges. 2

# 1 Introduction 

Increasing demand for more efficient, reliable, and sustainable freight transport systems 

have multiplied the need for advanced planning, modelling, and optimization techniques. Logistics 

Service Providers (LSPs) play a key role in such systems, acting as intermediaries who organize 

the transport of goods among various actors. Through the consolidation of cargo from multiple 

shippers and utilization of the services of multiple carriers, LSPs can achieve economies of scale 

and improved resource utilization. This central coordination role, however, introduces significant 

planning complexity, particularly because LSPs must make decisions on a multitude of levels and 

under many sources of uncertainty. 

One of the most significant tactical problems LSPs must deal with is the Service Network 

Design (SND) problem, which addresses the optimum design of transport services , in terms of 

selecting service routes, scheduling frequencies, and allocating capacities , in order to meet 

customer requests at minimum cost. Classical SND models are typically formulated as 

deterministic problems, while in actual freight transport networks a high level of uncertainty exists. 

Travel time uncertainty, stochastic demand, limite d fleet capacity, and other service disruptions 

all impact service reliability and operational efficiency. In multimodal networks, where services 

include more than one transportation mode such as road, rail, or waterways, the impact and 

complexity added by these uncertainties is further emphasized by the need to coordinate across 

operating conditions and service schedules. To address these challenges, recent research began 

incorporating stochastic elements into SND models, examining approaches such as scena rio -

based stochastic programming, robust optimization , and simulation -based approaches. However, 

there are still significant limitations. Many studies continue to focus on unimodal systems or treat 

multimodality in a simplistic manner. Furthermore, most existing approaches do not consider the 

option of modifying decisions dynamically in response to real -time disruptions. In particular, 

unification of tactical -level decisions (e.g., service selection and capacity planning) and 

operational -level decisions (e.g., truck allocation, vehicle routing, and dyna mic re -planning) has 

received little attention. 

To fill these gaps, this paper proposes a hybrid approach that integrates metaheuristics, 

simulation and machine learning techniques , which is able to address a complex version of the 

SND . The algorithm is designed to address the SND problem faced by an LSP operating in a 

multimodal freight transport network, where trucks operate flexibly while fixed train and barge 

schedules must be explicitly incorporated . Firstly , an algorithm is designed to solve the 

deterministic SND, which is later extended to address the problem with stochastic road travel 

times , finite truck fleet capacity , and adaptive re -planning decisions to face truck delays . The 3

approach incorporates tactical and operational decision -making, enabling the generation of robust 

plans that can adjust dynamically to disruptions. A simulated annealing (SA) metaheuristic is 

designed to solve the SND obtain ing high -quality solutions for large -scale problems. This is 

integrated with a simulation model, where operational complexities like dynamic truck allocation, 

vehicle routing, and re -planning policies due to travel time variability are included. To mitigate the 

computational burden of ev aluating numerous candidate solutions, a regression -based surrogate 

model that estimates the costs is integrated into the optimization routine to allow for fast and 

adaptive decision -making. The numerical results highlight the effectiveness of the proposed 

methods in addressing both deterministic and stochastic problems. They also show that, despite 

relying on relatively simple techniques (SA and a regression model), their integration delivers 

strong perfor mance without requiring more complex or sophisticated approaches. This 

demonstrates that practical, scalable solutions for re al -world and large -scale freight transport 

planning can be achieved without excessive algorithmic complexity, making the approach both 

accessible and adaptable for logistics practitioners. 

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of the 

relevant literature. Section 3 provides a detailed description of the problem under investigation ,

describing the deterministic and stochastic versions of the SND . Section 4 outlines the proposed 

hybrid solution approach, describing the different components and its integration . Section 5 

reports the experimental results and evaluates the performance of the proposed method. Finally, 

Section 6 concludes the paper and discu sses potential directions for future research. 

# 2 Literature review 

This section reviews relevant literature for this study. Firstly, Section 2.1 examines 

research on service network design under uncertainty, with particular emphasis on multimodal 

systems, scheduled services, and stochastic travel times. Then, Section 2.2 provides a brief 

overview of how machine learning techniques have been used to enhance optimization methods 

in related freight transport planning problems. Finally, Section 2.3 highlights the main research 

gaps and positions the contributions of this paper within the existing literature. 

2.1 Service network design under uncertainty 

SND is a well -established problem that models the tactical decisions of an LSP in a freight 

transport network. Numerous versions of the problem exist, differing in assumptions, decision 

variables, and constraints. Comprehensive reviews of traditional model s and solution approaches 

can be found in Elbert et al. [1] , Crainic and Hewitt [2] , and Crainic and Rei [3] . In its basic 

formulation, SND takes as input a graph representing the physical network and a set of transport 4

orders or requests, sometimes also referred as commodities. The key decisions involve selecting 

which services to operate, determining their capacities or frequencies, and assigning cargo flows 

to these services. The objective is to meet transport demand w hile minimizing costs for the LSP. 

Variants of SND introduce extensions such as traffic flow balancing, crew planning, dynamic 

operations, and multimodal networks. Given its tactical nature, numerous studies have explored 

SND under uncertainty. This paper examines SND in a multimodal context with scheduled 

services and uncertain road travel times, so the rest of the literature review focus on those 

aspects, particularly restricted to studies that consider uncertainty 

The SND under uncertainty has received less attention than its deterministic counterpart, 

though interest has grown in recent years. Delbart et al. [4] provide an overview of early studies 

in this area, particularly those considering intermodal or multimodal transport systems. They note 

that most studies focus on a single mode of transport, identifying only 14 papers between 2009 

and 2018 that explicitly incorporate multiple transport modes. Since 2018, research has continued 

to concentrate primarily on uni modal systems. Our review identifies 17 relevant papers published 

since 2018 that address SND under uncertainty (see Table 1), of which only six consider 

multimodal systems. In general, the modes of transport correspond to a combination between 

road, rail or waterways [5 –9] , although alternatives such as hydrogen pipelines, combined with 

trucks, can also be considered [10] . Most recent studies consider demand as the main source of 

uncertainty, although some incorporate uncertainties related to transit times, available service 

capacities, or transport costs. Regarding objective functions, most models minimize expected 

costs, incorporating elements such as transit, storage, and transfer costs, as well as delay 

penalties and pollutant emissions quantifications. Ghavamifar et al. [11] use an alternative 

objective, as they maximize profits by also optimizing price levels. Ghanei et al. [12] adopt a multi -

objective approach that seeks to maximize system fairness alongside cost minimization. Decision 

variables also vary substantially across studies . Most models include decisions on freight flow 

distribution and service selection or scheduling, with several extending to additional decisions 

from related problems such as facility location [13,14] and transport outsourcing [15,16] .

Furth ermore, some models incorporate fleet management aspects, including fleet allocation [15] 

and vehicle routing [7,15,17] .5                                                                                                            

> Table 1: Recent literature on SND with uncertainties.
> Reference
> Uncertainty
> source Objective
> Problem
> characteristics Method
> DL TT SC TC MM FM TD RR
> Ghavamifar et al. [11] xprofit Exact
> Hrušovský et al. [5] xcost xxExact / simulation -based optimization
> Layeb et al. [6] xxcost xxSimulation -based optimization
> Richter and Stiller [19] xcost Heuristic
> Zhao et al. [9] xxcost xxMetaheuristic
> Hewitt et al. [15] xcost xxMatheuristic
> Saedinia et al. [14] xcost Exact
> Uddin and Huynh [8] xcost xxExact
> Wang and Qi [18] xcost xExact
> Baubaid et al. [20] xcost Exact / heuristic
> Govindan and
> Gholizadeh [13] xcost Metaheuristic
> Lanza et al. [21] xcost xExact / metaheuristic
> Müller et al. [7] xcost xxxMetaheuristic
> Xiang et al. [16] xcost xExact
> Deng et al. [10] xxcost xExact
> Ghanei et al. [12] xcost,
> fairness Exact
> Liu et al. [17] xcost xMatheuristic
> This paper xprofit xxxxMetaheuristic / s imulation -based
> optimization
> Abbreviations used in the table:
> -Uncertainty sources: demand level (DL), travel times (TT), service capacity (SC), transport costs (TC).
> -Problem characteristics: multimodal (MM), fleet management (FM), time dependent model (TD), real -time
> replanning (RR).

Most studies formulate SND under uncertainty as a stochastic mixed -integer programming 

model, assuming some parameters follow a known probability distribution. These are typically 

two -stage problems: the first stage involves tactical decision -making, while the second stage 

addresses operational decisions once uncertainties realize. For instance, excess demand may 

require rerouting or outsourcing, while transit times longer than expected may lead to schedule 

adjustments. These models commonly use scenario -ba sed approaches to deal with the 

uncertainties. Alternative modelling approaches include chance -constrained models [8,9], robust 

optimization [14,18] and simulation -based methods [5,6]. While many of these studies propose 

models that are dynamic in the sens e that they account for time -dependent decisions, none of 

them explicitly incorporate real -time replanning into the problem formulation. Although two -stage 

models incorporate, to some degree, reaction decisions to face uncertainty, the scenario -based 

appro aches mean that these reactions are precomputed rather than dynamically adapted. 6

Therefore, they develop plans that are optimal across a limited set of predefined scenarios, 

instead of modelling truly dynamic decision -making in a real -time context. 

In terms of solution methods, most studies propose exact methods, either using 

commercial solvers to solve the formulated model [8,12,14,21] or developing decomposition and 

column -generation techniques [10,11,16,18] . Due to the problem complexity, heuristic 

approaches have also been explored, including ad -hoc heuristics [19,20] , matheuristics [15,17] ,

and metaheuristics such as ant colony optimization [9] , cross -entropy algorithm [13] , and iterated 

local search [7] . In this paper we propose a simulation -bas ed optimization technique, and there 

are studies in the recent literature that apply related techniques to the SND under uncertainty. 

Hrušovský et al. [5] propose an iterative approach in which a deterministic model generates a 

transport plan for a multimodal network, which is then tested for reliability using a simulation 

model. If the plan is found to be unreliable, the deterministic model is re -solved wi th additional 

constraints to avoid the identified unreliable connections. The simulation model account s for 

uncertain travel times, leading to potential delays and missed connections. However, in cases of 

missed connections, freight is rerouted via trucks without additional re -planning decisions. 

Furthermore, the model does not incorporate fleet management or vehicle routing. Layeb et al. 

[6] adopt a different simulation -based optimization approach, integrating an optimization module 

addressed by a commercial optimization software, with a simulation module for the evaluation of 

candidate solutions. They add ress the problem of scheduling a set of services in a multimodal 

network, under uncertain demand and travel times. However, similar to the previous case, the 

simulation model does not incorporate fleet management or vehicle routing decisions , nor does it 

include re -planning mechanisms to mitigate uncertainties. 

2.2 Machine learning in freight transport planning 

The intersection of machine learning (ML) and combinatorial optimization has received 

growing attention in recent years, with surveys highlighting the advancements and opportunities 

of integrating ML with different optimization techniques [22,23] . This growing interest is also 

evident in research on planning and optimization within freight transport problems. However, the 

application of ML to solve the SND problem remains relatively limited. Most existing research has 

focused on classical combinatorial problems such as the Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) and the 

Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) [24 –26] . These problems, fundamental to logistics and supply 

chain management, aim to determine cost -efficient vehicle routes while satisfying constraints like 

vehicle capacity and delivery time windows. As these can be considered subproblems within the 7

broader SND framework, insights gained from VRP and TSP studies offer valuable guidance for 

developing new approaches to SND. 

Recent studies have highlighted the efficacy of ML -based methods in tackling optimization 

challenges, in some cases surpassing traditional optimization techniques. Many propose end -to -

end approaches, leveraging neural networks and reinforcement learning to generate complete 

solutions from scratch. While these methods can produce high -quality solutions rapidly, their 

tra ining is typically time -consuming, as they require large sets of training data. Moreover, their 

ability to generalize to more complex proble m definitions, such as those involving more decisions 

beyond vehicle routing, is often limited. Hybrid methods represent an alternative approach that 

can partially overcome these challenges. ML models can be embedded within heuristic or 

metaheuristic algorithms to enhance their efficiency, for instance by learning patterns of high -

quality solutions to guide the search process or by selecting suitable operators during 

optimization. This way, hy brid approaches can combine the domain knowledge of optimization 

techniques with the adaptability of ML, leading to improved performance in solving complex 

problems [26,27] . In addition to hybrid strategies, other data -driven methods have been 

increasingly adopted. Techniques like surrogate modeling [28] and Bayesian optimization [29] 

approximate complex or computationally expensive cost functions, enabling faster solution 

evaluations. Similarly, inverse optimization has been employed to infer model parameters from 

observed behaviors, facilitating the calibration of mode ls based on real -world data [30] . Other 

approaches can be used to aid traditional optimization algorithms and improve their performance ,

for example, by reduc ing the problem size through the prediction of variable s that can be fixed 

[31 –33] , or by using ML to select and configure the best algorithm setting to solve a specific 

instance of the problem [34] . Furthermore, beyond direct optimization, ML applications also 

extend to various supporting aspects of transportation planning. Techniques such as deep neural 

networks and reinforcement learning are used to predict routing behavior and traffic flow, 

provid ing critical inputs for optimization models. Additionally, these methods enable demand 

forecasting, travel time prediction, preventive maintenance scheduling, and anomaly detection in 

transport data, showcasing their versatility in enhancing multiple aspec ts of transportation 

systems [35,36] . Together, these advancements illustrate the growing potential of integrating 

learning -based and data -driven techniques with established optimization methods, offering more 

flexible, scalable, and adaptive tools for addressing the complexities of modern tra nsportation 

systems. 8

2.3 Contributions to the literature 

The insights from this literature review highlight that, despite growing interest in stochastic 

formulations of the SND problem, significant gaps remain, particularly in multimodal transport 

systems and the development of adaptive solution methods. Most approaches rely on scenario -

based stochastic programming or robust optimization, which require predefined uncertainty 

representations and offer limited flexibility for real -time decision -making. While simulation -based 

methods have been explored, they have pr imarily been used to evaluate the feasibility or resulting 

costs of candidate solutions, rather than actively integrating optimization and decision -making 

within the simulation framework. Additionally, key operational elements such as fleet 

management, vehicle routing, and adaptive re -planning remain underexplored. In contrast, the 

approach proposed in this paper advances the field by integrating a simulation model that not 

only accounts for uncertainty but also incorporates dynamic decision -making and the cascading 

effects of uncertain travel times. Unlike existing methods, our simulation -based optimization 

approach allows for real -time adaptations of the decisions within the simulation itself, resulting in 

a more flexible and adaptive framework. Moreover, the proposed framework allow s to consider 

more realistic assumptions about the dynamics within the system , providing a more realistic 

representation of the problem. Finally, adaptive learning techniques are incorporated wit hin the 

solution framework to overcome the computational cost of simulation, an aspect that also has not 

been included in the research of the SND problem . Overall, the framework integrates well -

established yet flexible and scalable modeling and optimization techniques, which in combination 

provide an efficient and high -performing method for tackling a comple x representation of the 

stochastic SND. 

# 3 Problem description 

This paper addresses the SND , where a n LSP makes tactical decisions regarding 

transport request acceptance, capacity booking on train and barge services, and the allocation 

and routing of trucks. We consider two versions of this problem: deterministic and stochastic. The 

deterministic version foll ows the definition in Zhang et al. [37] and serves as a benchmark for 

comparison with existing literature. The stochastic version extends the deterministic model by 

incorporating uncertainty in road travel times and a limited truck fleet, which increases t he 

operational impact of truck delays , enabling a more robust decision making at the tactical level. 

3.1 Deterministic problem 

We analyze an LSP operating in a multimodal long -haul logistics network . In this tactical 

planning problem, the LSP must decide which transport requests to accept and fulfil. Additionally, 9

a set of scheduled train and barge services with predefined capacities is available, requiring the 

LSP to determine how many capacity slots to book for each leg in each service. The LSP also 

operates a fleet of trucks, which, in the deterministic problem, is assumed to be unlimited, so truck 

connections are always available and uncapacitated. The LSP also designs a transport plan, 

specifying for each transport requests the transport(s) mode(s) to be used and the route to be 

followed.                                                            

> Table 2: Notation on problem formulation.
> Notation Description
> Sets:
> 𝐺 (𝑁 ,𝐴 )Graph representing physical network.
> 𝑅 Transport requests indexed by 𝑟 .
> 𝑆 Train and barge services indexed by 𝑠 .
> 𝐿 Service legs indexed by 𝑙 .
> 𝐿 !⊆𝐿 Set of legs comprising service s.
> 𝑃 Feasible paths indexed by 𝑝 .
> 𝑃 "⊆𝑃 Feasible paths for request 𝑟 .
> 𝑃 #⊆𝑃 Feasible paths that use leg 𝑙 .
> Parameters :
> 𝑏 "Reward of accepting request 𝑟 [EUR].
> 𝑑 "Size of request 𝑟 [containers].
> 𝑐 $
> transit Transit cost of path 𝑝 [EUR/container].
> 𝑐 $
> transfer Transfer cost of path 𝑝 [EUR/container].
> 𝑐 $
> store Storage cost of path 𝑝 [EUR/container].
> 𝑐 $
> delay Delay cost of path 𝑝 [EUR/container].
> 𝑒 #Available capacity in service leg 𝑙 [containers].
> 𝑔 #Cost of booking in service leg 𝑙 [EUR/container].
> Decision variables:
> x%Binary variable, 1 if request 𝑟 is selected.
> 𝑦 #Number of slots (containers) booked in service leg 𝑙 .
> 𝑧 ",$Number of containers from request 𝑟 using path 𝑝 .

Table 2 presents the notation used in the problem formulation of this problem. The problem 

is formulated assuming a physical network 𝐺 ( 𝑁 , 𝐴 ), where 𝑁 is the set of nodes, which can 

correspond to the origin -destination locations of the transport requests and/or intermodal 

terminals, and 𝐴 is the set of arcs connecting them. In this study we assume 𝐺 is a complete 

graph, since all locations are connected by road with a known distance. Additionally, some pair 

of nodes can be connected by train or barge services (multiple services can connect the same 

OD pair at different times) . Over this network, a path is defined as a feasible route, potentially 

consisting of multiple legs via truck, train, and/or barge. The feasibility of a path is determined by 

the requests’ time window and the departure and arrival times associated with each leg. For truck 

legs, departure times are flexible and travel times depend on the distance traveled. In contrast, 

train and barge legs follow the predefined schedules of the corresponding services, wi th fixed 

departure and arrival times. Feasibility therefore requires temporal consistency along the entire 

path: each leg must be reachable given the arrival time from the previou s leg, allowing sufficient 10 

transfer time at intermediate terminals. In addition, the resulting path tim ing must comply with the 

request’s time window. The lower bound of the time window is enforced as a hard constraint, 

while the upper bound is treated as a soft constraint, with penalties incurred for late deliveries. 

The identification of feasible transport paths is a com plex problem in itself, which for simplicity is 

implicit in the presented formulation. These feasible paths can be pre -computed using a method 

as the one described in Section 4.2 . It must be noted that the composition of the feasible path set 

used may affect the performance of the solution algorithms for this problem. Under these 

assumptions, t he decision variables of the problem are: the selection of transport requests to be 

served ( x!), the number of capacity slots booked on each service leg ( 𝑦 "), and the assignment of 

transport paths to each selected request ( 𝑧 #,%). 

𝑀𝑎𝑥 𝑍 = & '𝑏 !𝑥 ! − & 𝑧 !,#+𝑐 # 

> transit

+ 𝑐 # 

> transfer

+ 𝑐 # 

> store

+ 𝑐 #

> delay

.

> #∈%!

/

> !∈&

− & 𝑔 '𝑦 '

> '∈(

(1)

& 𝑧 !,#

> #∈%!

= 𝑑 !𝑥 ! , ∀𝑟 ∈ 𝑅 (2)

& & 𝑧 !,#

> !∈&#∈%"

≤ 𝑦 ' , ∀𝑙 ∈ 𝐿 (3)

𝑦 ' ≤ 𝑒 ' , ∀𝑙 ∈ 𝐿 (4)

x) ∈ {0,1} , ∀𝑟 ∈ 𝑅 (5)

𝑦 ' ∈ ℕ* , ∀𝑙 ∈ 𝐿 (6)

𝑧 !,# ∈ ℕ* , ∀𝑟 ∈ 𝑅 , ∀𝑝 ∈ 𝑃 ! (7)

The objective function (1) aims to maximize the LSP’s profit. Revenue is generated from 

the rewards associated with selected transport requests, while costs include transportation 

expenses (in -vehicle transit, transfers, storage, and delay penalties) and capacity booking costs 

for train and barge services. Constraints (2) ensure that a transport plan is defined for all accepted 

requests, allowing for the splitting of a request across multiple paths. Constraints (3) guarantee 

that the booked capacity is sufficient to transport the as signed containers for each service leg ,

while constraints (4) restrict the total booked capacity to the maximum available for each service 

leg . Constraints (5)-(7) specify the binary and integer nature of the decision variables. 11 

3.2 Stochastic problem 

The stochastic version extends the deterministic problem by incorporating uncertain road 

travel times and a limited truck fleet . These assumptions affect both the problem definition and 

the modelling approach . In particular, this problem emphasizes the relationship between tactical 

and operational level decisions and the feedback loop between them in order to adapt the 

decisions accordingly . A schematic view of the main characteristics of the stochastic problem is 

provided in Figure 1, highlighting the main decisions at each decision level . It must be noted that 

operational re -planning decisions are taken dynamically in a rolling -horizon manner as uncertainty 

unfolds. Therefore, the problem does not correspond to a classical two -stage stochastic 

programming model. The following subsections describe in more detail the specific assumptions 

and implications when incorporating uncertain travel times and the limited truck fleet in the 

problem.     

> Figure 1: Interaction between tactical and operation al level decisions in the stochastic problem.

3.2.1 Uncertain travel times 

We assume that road travel times are uncertain due to two main factors: road disruptions 

and individual truck variability. Road disruptions introduce systematic delays affecting all trucks 

traveling on a given link for a certain period . These are events that normally happen with a low 

probability and may have a big impact on the affected tr uck trips . Additionally, travel times may 

vary between individual trucks, introducing minor variability compared to that caused by 

disruptions , but that affect all truck trips during the simulation . Then, the road travel time for a 

## Operational problem 

Decisions: 

- Truck -container allocation 

- Truck routing 

- Transport plan updates 

Decisions: 

- Request selection 

- Service and capacity booking 

- Initial transport plan design 

## Tactical problem           

> -Available requests
> -Train/barge services
> -Truck fleet size
> -Truck fleet details
> -Uncertain travel times
> -Set of requests
> -Available
> capacity
> -Transport plan
> -Operational
> costs

12 

given truck at a given occurrence is determined by incorporating both sources of uncertainty into 

the baseline expected travel time , as shown in Equation (8), where 𝑡 ̃&' represents an instance of 

the actual travel time between locations 𝑖 and 𝑗 , 𝜂 /&' accoun ts for ongoing disruptions that 

systematically affect all trucks on the road segment , 𝜀 ̃ accounts for the individual variations in 

travel time for each truck , and 𝑡 ̅&' denotes the baseline expected travel time in the absence of 

disruptions or individual variations. 

𝑡 ̃+, = H1 + 𝜂 J+, K (1 + 𝜀 ̃ ) 𝑡 ̅+, , 𝜂 J+, ∈ [0, 𝜂 -./ ], 𝜀 ̃ ∈ [𝜀 0+1 , 𝜀 023 ] (8)

Besides the particular trip between two nodes, t hese uncertainties can cause cascading 

delays throughout the transport network. For instance, a delayed truck may fail to meet a 

scheduled connection with a train or barge, resulting in a significantly larger overall delay for the 

corresponding request . Moreover, if the truck is assigned to transport multiple requests 

sequentially, its delay in one task may propagate to subsequent assignments. Therefore, delays 

of trucks may trigger the need to adapt the origi nal travel plans. To handle these uncertainties, 

the problem is structured as a bi -level decision process. At the tactical level, the LSP selects 

transport requests, books capacity on train and barge services, and drafts an initial transport plan. 

However, as disruptions oc cur or delays propagates through the plan , this plan must be 

dynamically adapted during operations to accommodate these variations in travel times. 

3.2.2 Limited truck fleet 

In contrast to the deterministic version, the stochastic problem considers a finite truck fleet, 

requiring the explicit allocation of containers to specific trucks and the determination of their 

routing sequences, specifying the order in which various transport requests will be served. It is 

assumed that the LSP possesses a certain number of trucks, each assign ed to a designated 

depot. Consequently, each truck’s route must commence and conclude at its respective depot 

within the planning horizon . The truck fleet introduce s additional planning requirements , thereby 

increasing the complexity of the problem. Furthermore, as previously noted, delays in the 

transportation of one request may affect subsequent requests scheduled on the same truck, 

increasing the propagation of delays. To address this, it is assumed that the truck routing plan is 

flexible, allowing for adjustments to routes and container allocations based on the system ’s

current state. Accordingly, a provisional initial travel plan is generated at the tactical leve l, outlining 

the planned route for each request. Nevertheless, this plan is likely to be revised, meaning the 

actual routes followed , and consequently the associated cost components , are only fully known 

at the operational level. 13 

3.2.3 Objective function 

The characteristics of the stochastic problem imply that not all costs can be fully 

determined in advance, and additional unforeseen costs may arise during operations, which must 

be assumed by the LSP. In this context, the objective function for the stochastic problem maintains 

a structure similar to that of the deterministic case but considering the expected cost for the 

uncertain components . However, unlike classical stochastic optimization approaches, the 

uncertain costs in this problem do not follow a known probability distribution. Rather, they emerge 

from complex interactions between uncertain travel times and routing decisions within a

multimodal transport network. Given the flexible routing approa ch assumed in this problem ,

relevant additional costs at the operational level may be related to extra kilometers driven, 

extended storage durations, or additional transshipments. Furthermore, delays may result in late 

deliveries to the LSP’s customers, potentially incurring long term reputational damage in addition 

to potential fines or compensations . To account for this, a penalty factor is incorporated, 

proportional to the number of hours a container arrives late at its destination. Given these 

considera tions, the LSP’s profit maximization objective is formulated in Equation (9). T he revenue 

from accepted requests (ℛ) and the cost of the booked capacity in scheduled services (𝐶 ()% ) are 

defined at the tactical level . The expected value is considered for the cost components that are 

uncertain, namely: in -vehicle transit ( 𝐶 4*#)+,&* ), transfer (𝐶 4*#)+,-.# ), storage (𝐶 4,*/#. ), and delay 

penalizations ( 𝐶 40.")1 ). 

𝑍 = ℛ − +𝐶 42# + 𝐸 H𝐶 U5!216+5 K + 𝐸 H𝐶 U5!21678! K + 𝐸 H𝐶 U659!8 K + 𝐸 H𝐶 U:8'2; K. (9)

# 4 Solution approach 

Due to the complexity of the problem, heuristic procedures are developed to ensure 

reasonable computational times. A n SA algorithm is proposed , in which the SA operators 

determine the main tactical decisions, specifically the selection of transport requests and the 

scheduled services to be used. Once these key decisions are made, container and truck routing 

decisions are handled using methods that differ between the deterministic and stochastic versions 

of the problem. Notably, for the stochastic version, a simulation model is incorporated to assess 

the impact of uncertain travel times and limited truck availability. To mitigate the computational 

burden of the simulation process, a simple surrogate model is proposed an d embedded within 

the SA to estimate the costs. Moreover, a learning -based adaptive method is designed to improve 

the performance of this surrogate model . The following sections provide a detailed explanation of 

each component of the solution approach. 14 

4.1 Simulated annealing algorithm 

SA is a well -known metaheuristic algorithm that has been successfully applied to various 

optimization problems. In this study, SA is chosen for its simplicity and promising preliminary 

results when applied to the problem under investigation. In essence, SA corresponds to a single -

solution iterative algorithm, in which at each iteration a neighbor solution is generated, and it is 

evaluated against the current one, selecting with a probabilistic criterion which one passes to the 

next iteration. There are multiple variants in specific components of SA, and in this paper, we use 

an algorithm with an adaptive cooling schedule and re -heating mechanism. In our implementation, 

the solutions are represented by vectors which determine which transport requests are sele cted 

and how much capacity is booked in each leg of the scheduled service s. Under this design, the 

evaluation step is not trivial and varies according to the problem version. For the deterministic 

problem, the evaluation procedure includes a heuristic that designs a transport plan, determining 

the paths for each selected request using the selected services (see section 4.2 ), from which the 

total profits can be computed . For the stochastic problem, the evaluation procedure is enhanced 

with a surrogate model that is trained using the insights of a simulation model , to account for the 

uncertainties and additional decisions included in the problem (see section 4.3 ). 

4.2 Deterministic problem evaluation 

For the deterministic problem, the evaluation step of the SA is addressed using a heuristic 

method , which define s the path for each selected request using the booked capacity in scheduled 

services , to then calculate the profits . These paths account for request time windows, service 

schedules, and travel times by truck, if applicable. Feasible paths can be multimodal, 

concatenating legs with different transport modes and services , although simplifying restrictions 

are imposed . In particular, trucks may be used for first - and last -mile legs when necessary, with 

up to two intermediate train or barge service legs (i.e., a maximum of four legs in total). To improve 

computational efficiency, all feasible paths for each transport requ est are precomputed prio r to 

the execution of the SA algorithm, generating a pool of feasible paths per request. Then, during 

the evaluation of each candidate solution, this pool is filtered according to the services selected 

and the corresponding capacities available in that sol ution. 

The precomputed pool of feasible solutions is generated as follows. Firstly, for each pair 

of nodes (independent of demand) , all the possible connections using only train and barge 

services are identified. At this stage, at most one transfer is allowed, ensuring sufficient transfer 

time where applicable . Next, for each transport request, feasible paths are constructed by 

considering its specific time window. These may include direct truck connections or combinations 15 

of truck and scheduled service legs through intermediate transfer nodes . At this stage , for first -

mile truck legs, travel times are explicitly considered to ensure timely arrival for connection with 

scheduled services, if applicable . It is worth noting that the direct truck connection is always a 

feasible path, for every transport request. Then , the cost of each feasible path is calculated based 

on the cost components defined in Section 3.1 .

A specific candidate solution can be then evaluated using this pool of feasible paths. This 

involves constructing t he overall transport plan according to the procedure described in Algorithm 

1, where 𝑞 #,% ∈ 𝑄 is an auxiliary variable indicating whether request 𝑟 is assigned to a path 

including service leg 𝑙 , and 𝑃 ′ ⊆ 𝑃 denotes the filtered subset of precomputed feasible paths, 

where any path using a service leg without selected capacity in the candidate solution is 

discarded . The plan consists of the route to be followed by each container in each transport 

request, respecting the maximum capacities of the selected services . The algorithm begins by 

assigning all containers of each selected request 𝑟 ∈ 𝑅 2 to the cheapest available transport 

alternative, considering only the selected train and barge services (set 𝑆 ′). Next, service 

capacities are checked for each leg 𝑙 in each select ed service , and if the load assigned to that leg 

(𝑞 ") in the current plan exceeds the available capacity in that leg ( 𝑙 ()% ), a reassignment procedure 

is triggered. In this step, some containers are rerouted to the next cheapest feasible path with 

available capacity. The request to be reassigned (𝑟 ∗ ∈ 𝑅 ", where 𝑅 " is the set of requests currently 

assigned to a path that includes leg 𝑙 ) is selected as the one that minimizes the increase in total 

cost , by searching the corresponding next cheapest alternative path (𝑝 ∗ ∈ 𝑃 ). Then, the number 

of containers to be reassigned is calculated, considering current the excess load in the leg, the 

amount from request 𝑟 ∗ currently assigned to that leg ( 𝑞 #,"), and the available capacity in the new 

path considering 𝑝 ∗ the current transport plan. This reassignment process continues iteratively 

until all train and barge services respect their maximum capacity constraints. It is important to 

note that in this deterministic problem, the truck fleet is assumed to be unlimited, ensuring that 

the problem is always feasible. If necessary, any remaining demand can always be transported 

entirely by truck from the origin to destination, albeit at a potentially higher cost. 16      

> Algorithm 1:Heuristic for deterministic solution evaluation .
> //Initialization
> 𝑄 ←0
> for each

𝑟 ∈ 𝑅 ′      

> {𝑄 }←𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛 _𝑐 ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑠𝑡 _𝑝𝑎𝑡 ℎ(𝑆 &,𝑃 ′,𝑟 )
> end for
> for each 𝑠

∈ 𝑆 ′  

> for each 𝑙

∈ 𝐿 𝑠   

> while 𝑞 %

> 𝑙 𝑐𝑎𝑝  

> //Search best alternative
> for each

𝑟 ∈ 𝑅 '                 

> {𝑟 ∗,𝑝 ∗}←𝑔𝑒𝑡 _𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 _𝑐 ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑠𝑡 _𝑝𝑎𝑡 ℎ(𝑆 &,𝑃 ′,𝑄 ,𝑟 )
> end for
> //Determine and re -assign correct amount
> 𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑡𝑎 ←min (𝑙 ()* ,𝑞 #∗,%,𝑝 ∗.𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒 _𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 (𝑄 ))
> {𝑄 }←𝑟𝑒 _𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛 (𝑟 ∗,𝑝 ∗,𝑑𝑒𝑙𝑡𝑎 )
> end while
> end for
> end for

4.3 Stochastic problem evaluation 

The evaluation step of the stochastic problem is more complex because not all costs can 

be determined in advance. Additionally, unlike the deterministic case, the stochastic problem 

accounts for a limited truck fleet, making truck allocation and routing crucial considerations .

Moreover, it assumes the LSP makes adaptive re -planning decisions to deal with the uncertain 

travel times . To address this complexity, a discrete event simulation model is developed to 

simulate the operations of the LSP over a given timeframe based on th e tactical decisions 

previously described. A simulation -based approach is selected due to its flexibility in handling 

uncertainties and its ability to capture the cascading effects of delays and disruptions. The model 

also allows for dynamic planning decisions by the LSP, enabling them to adapt to disruptions and 

minimize their impact. The simulation provides an accurate estimation of expected costs, which 

can then be used within the SA framework to evaluate candidate solutions. However, running a 

full simu lation for each candidate solution can be computationally expensive, particularly for large 

problem instances , making it unpractical for optimization purposes . To address this issue, this 

study proposes a simple surrogate model based on a regression function that estimates delay 

costs without the need to run the simulation for every candidate solution . Additionally, a n adaptive 

method is introduced to enhance solution quality while keeping computational complexity 

manageable. The following subsections describe the simulation model and its integration with the 

SA algorithm. 17 

4.3.1 Simulation model 

The simulation model represents the operation al level decisions of an LSP within a 

multimodal logistics network with uncertain road travel times and scheduled train and barge 

services. The main inputs to the model include the graph 𝐺 ( 𝑁 , 𝐴 ) representing the physical 

network, the scheduled train and barge services with reserved capacity, the size and locations of 

the truck fleet, the set of selected requests, the initial travel plan for the selected requests, and 

various other parameters defi ning the problem instance. As mentioned before, besides uncertain 

travel times, the stochastic model differs from the deterministic one by considering a limited fleet 

of trucks. This fleet is operated by the same LSP, who must decide on the allocation of containers 

to specific truck vehicles and determine the sequencing and routing of these trucks. Overall, two 

main decision processes are executed within the simulation, which in turn are addressed in the 

model by means of three heuristic methods. The tw o main decision processes are: 

• Operationalize the initial transport plan: The initial transport plan (generated by Algorithm 

1), specifies for each selected transport request the sequence of legs, indicating the origin, 

destination, transport mode, and the corresponding service for trains and barges. Before 

the start of the simulation, for each truck leg a specific truck must be assigned that can 

complete the task within the corresponding time window, which is determined by the request 

time window and the scheduled times of train and bar ge services used in subsequent legs. 

The truck -container allocation heuristic is called sequentially for each container and each 

truck leg, until all truck legs in the plan are assigned. However, it is possible that no truck in 

the fleet can complete a giv en truck leg within the time window. In such cases, the travel 

plan for that specific request is deemed infeasible, triggering a search for an alternative 

route using the container routing heuristic. 

• Adapt transport plan after significant delay: During the simulation, the uncertain travel times 

can lead to truck delays , which are considered significant when planned routes become 

unfeasible (due to missed connections). When a truck arrives late to any node, it is checked 

if the intended time windows can be achieved, both for its current cargo as for later requests 

in its planned route. If the time window cannot be respected for a given truck leg, first it is 

checked if the truck leg can be assigned to a new truck, calling the truck -container heuristic. 

If that is not possible, then the request travel plan is scrapped, and a new route is searched 

using the container routing heuristi c. 

Therefore, the aforementioned decision processed are addressed by repeatedly calling 

simple heuristics, namely: 18 

• Container -truck allocation: Containers are allocated to a specific truck in the fleet 

considering a truck leg (origin, destination, time window). The allocation is determined by 

searching for the best insertion, looping over the planned routes for every tr uck, selecting 

the one that lead to the smallest total travelled distance increment. 

• Container routing: As mentioned before, the container routing heuristic is needed when the 

original travel plan for a request is deemed unfeasible, due to a train/barge connection that 

cannot be reached on time. In such case, a new route is searched using the precomputed 

pool of feasible paths (see Section 4.2 ), but in this case the feasibility of the truck legs is 

considered, which determined with the heuristic for the container -truck allocation. It is 

important to note that this method assumes a high degr ee of flexibility in the options to 

modify the transport plan, for example in the terms to changing the assignment of containers 

within scheduled services. 

• Truck routing: During these decision processes, also the routing of the trucks is defined and 

adapted dynamically. As mentioned before, the route of the trucks is constructed 

sequentially, looking for the best insertion of truck legs when required. 

It is worth noting that, instead of the aforementioned heuristics, the simulation model could 

incorporate alternative methods for truck allocation and routing optimization, as well as 

incorporating more complex interactions between multiple players, such a s dividing decisions 

between LSPs and carriers. The aim of this paper is to propose an adaptive simulation -based 

framework that leverage insights from the simulation model for the optimization process, that in 

future work could be extended to incorporate s uch more complex modelling in the operational 

model. 

In summary, in its current form, the simulation follows the process illustrated in Figure 2.

Initially, the initial transport plan is completed (operationalized) by determining the container -truck 

allocation and, if necessary, updating container routes . The discrete event simulation then is 

executed , processing events such as requests becoming available for pickup, vehicle departures 

and arrivals, and the start and end of loading and unloading operations. The only uncertainty 

considered in the current setting is truck travel time, which is calculated for each truck leg 

according to the description given in section 3.2.1 . When stochastic travel times cause a truck to 

arrive late at a destination, the travel plan is adapted if necessary, replanning the routing of trucks 

and containers as needed , using t he aforementioned heuristics procedures . At the end of the 

simulation, the relevant outcome of the operations can be calculated. For the purposes of this 

paper , the relevant outcome value corresponds to the operation costs and delay penalizations .19    

> Figure 2: Schematic view of the simulation process.

4.3.2 Surrogate model to estimate costs 

The simulation model described in the previous section allows for an accurate estimation 

of expected operational costs considering uncertain travel times and the replanning decisions 

made by the LSP at operational level . This estimation can be incorporated for more robust tactical 

level decisions of the LSP. However, the computation time of the simulation makes it impractical 

for optimization in large problem instances. To address this issue, a surrogate model is proposed 

to predict the se costs for a given solution of the stochastic problem. Although multiple cost 

components vary at operational level, preliminary experiments showed that the most critical one 

correspond s to the delay penalizations. Therefore, the proposed model consists of a regression 

function that focuses on estimating these delay costs and penalizations. Th e proposed approach 

consists of firstly defining a scalar variable, denoted as g, which aggregates relevant information 

about a candidate solution , and then fitting a function that takes g as input to estimate the total 

delay costs for that specific solution. 

The variable g is defined so as to capture the key characteristics of the solution that 

influence delay costs, particularly related to the truck legs in the initial transport plan. For each of 

these legs, the number of containers to be transported, the expected truck travel time, and the 

time window for the transport leg are initially known. With this in mind, g is calculated by 

considering only the truck legs in the initial plan for each selected request. The number of 

assigned containers is multiplied by the expected travel time, including loading and unloading. 

These values are summed and divided by the availab le truck hours, which is the product of the 

available truck fleet size and the total time window for all the selected requests. The calculation 

follows equation (10 ), where R is the set of selected requests ; 𝐿 # is the set of truck legs in the 

initial plan for request r; 𝑞 " is the number of container assigned to leg l; 𝑡 " is the total expected         

> Heuristic methods
> -Container routing
> -Truck -container allocation
> -Truck routing Adapt request’s
> transport plan
> Significant
> delay?
> All
> requests
> delivered?
> yes
> yes
> Simulation model
> no
> -Tactical decisions
> -Initial transport plan Estimated costs
> Execute transport
> plan
> (Discrete -events
> progression)
> Operationalize
> initial transport
> plan

20 

time associated to leg l; N is the number of available trucks ; and W is the length of the total time 

window considering the selected requests. 

g = ∑ ∑ 𝑞 ' ⋅ 𝑡 ''∈(!!∈&

𝑁 ⋅ 𝑊 (10 )

A systematic correlation is found between g and the delay costs obtained from the 

simulation model. To validate this relationship, a set of feasible solutions is generated for a given 

instance using the SA algorithm. To ensure diverse and representative solutions, selections are 

made from different stages of the SA process. Additionally, variations in problem parameters, 

such as the number of available transport requests and the relative size of the truck fl eet, are 

introduced. For each feasible solution, the value of g is calculated, and the simulation model is 

run to obtain expected delay costs. Figure 3 illustrate s the relation between g and the delay costs 

per container for the pool of solutions used in this study , showing a systematic correlation between 

both values , although it is a non -linear relation and at different scale s. Therefore, a function is 

then fitted , using nonlinear least squares regression, to estimate the total delay costs using the 

value of g. Various function forms are tested, with a cubic function yielding the best results. Then, 

equation (11) is used to estimate the total delay costs, and Figure 3 shows the comparison 

between the values of 𝑓 ′(γ) and the total delay costs obtained with the simulation model. The 

results indicate that this method performs well even when problem parameters change, meaning 

the regression model can be pre -trained and applied across multiple problem instances. However, 

it must be noted that all the experiments in this paper were performed on instances with the same 

underlying physical network. Therefore, further testing is required to evaluate performance on 

different networks. If necessary, the function should be refitt ed with appropriate data to ensure 

reliability in varied scenarios. 

E(Cdel ) = 𝑓 ′(γ) = a* + a@γ + aAγA + aBγB (11 )                

> (a) (b)
> Figure 3: Visualization of relation between 𝛄 and 𝐟 ′(𝛄 )with simulation delay costs.
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 00.5 11.5 22.5
> Delay cost per container
> (10 3 €)
> !
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Total delay cost (10 6 €)
> f(!)

21 

4.3.3 Adaptive SA 

The regression function proposed in the previous section can be incorporated into the SA 

framework to evaluate candidate solutions efficiently, allowing the generation of high -quality 

solutions without increasing computational time compared to deterministic methods. Sin ce the 

function can be fitted once and then applied to multiple problem instances, it significantly reduces 

computational overhead. However, better results may be obtained if the function parameters are 

adjusted to the specific instance being solved. Inste ad of performing a complete refitting process 

for each instance, an adaptive method is proposed to dynamically adjust the parameters based 

on data collected during the SA execution. 

The proposed adaptive method operates as follows. For most of the SA execution, 

candidate solutions are evaluated using the predefined regression function to estimate total delay 

costs. However, at every 𝑛 4 iterations, a set of 𝑛 5 candidate solutions , comprising the current 

solution and the neighbor solutions generated in previous iterations , is selected for evaluation 

using the simulation model, and the regression parameters are updated using the fitting procedure 

described earlier. Unlike the initial fitting process, which relies on a large dataset, this adaptation 

step uses only the 𝑛 5 selected solutions to update the regression parameters. To prevent 

excessive changes in the parameters, adjustments are capped at a maximum change of 𝜃 %. 

Additionally, this adaptation is only applied after at least 𝑛 6 iterations have been completed from 

the start of the SA process , ensuring that modifications occur only when the solution quality has 

reached a relatively stable level. The parameters 𝑛 4, 𝑛 5, 𝑛 6, and 𝜃 must be carefully tested and 

tuned to balance the potential improvement in solution quality with the additional computational 

cost incurred by running simulation evaluations during SA execution (see Table 3 for our case) .

4.4 Overview of the proposed SA variants 

In summary, the method proposed in this paper correspond to the SA using the adaptive 

surrogate model, which in the following sections will be denoted 𝑆 𝐴 7. However, to test its 

performance, other variants of the SA are used in the experiments for benchmarking. Overall , five 

variants of the SA algorithm are defined, each differing in the evaluation procedure :

• 𝑺 𝑨 𝑯 : Uses the heuristic procedure outlined in Algorithm 1 to evaluate each candidate 

solution. This serves as the baseline setting for solving the deterministic problem. 

• 𝑺 𝑨 𝑩 : Builds upon 𝑆 𝐴 : by incorporating a 10% buffer to all road travel times when generating 

travel plans . Preliminary experiments indicated that this buffer helps mitigate delays caused 

by uncertain travel times . However, its exact value (around 10%) does not significantly affect 

the results. Therefore, this buffer remains fixed in the subsequent SA variants .22 

• 𝑺 𝑨 𝑭 : Retains the heuristic evaluation approach from 𝑆 𝐴 : but integrates the regression 

function as surrogate model (see Section 4.3.2 ) into the objective function for candidate 

solutions. As previously mentioned, this regression function was fitted once and applied 

across all experiments, based on a pool of feasible solutions encompassing instances of 

various sizes. 

• 𝑺 𝑨 𝑨 : Adaptive algorithm that e xtends 𝑆 𝐴 = by dynamically adjusting the parameters of the 

regression function during the SA execution (see Section 4.3.3 ). 

• 𝑺 𝑨 𝑺 : Directly employs the simulation model to evaluate each candidate solution, yielding 

the most precise cost estimations. However, this approach comes at a significantly higher 

computational cost compared to the other variants. 

In summary, the first two variants ( 𝑆 𝐴 : and 𝑆 𝐴 ?) rely on fast heuristics for the evaluation 

step , but do not explicitly account for the additional complexities introduced in the stochastic 

problem . On the other hand, 𝑆 𝐴 @ uses the simulation model to evaluate candidate solutions, 

offering the true objective value for the stochastic problem. However, this approach is significantly 

more time -consuming. Therefore , 𝑆 𝐴 = and 𝑆 𝐴 7 aim to bridge this gap , by using learning 

techniques to use the insights derived from the simulation model more efficiently . As such, 𝑆 𝐴 =

and 𝑆 𝐴 7 will be referred to as the learning -based algorithm in the subsequent sections. 

# 5 Experimental results 

We perform various experiments to evaluate the performance of the proposed methods. 

Firstly, we assess the results obtained by applying the SA algorithm to solve the deterministic 

problem, comparing these outcomes with results available in the literature. Secondly, since no 

previous studies have addressed the stochastic problem with the same characteristics, 

comparisons in this case are made among the various algorithmic settings proposed in this paper. 

The experiments are conducted on instances of varying sizes, though all are based on the same 

physical network and set of available scheduled services. This benchmark instance, originally 

introduced by Guo et al. [38] , was also utilized by Zhang et al. [39] to evaluate multiple variants 

of the deterministic SND problem. The network consists of 10 terminals and 82 scheduled 

services, including both train and barge services . The size of the tested instances in this study is 

determined by the number of transport requests, which range from 5 to 1600. Further details 

regarding the benchmark instance can be found in Guo et al. [38] . The methods described in this 

paper were implemented in C++ and Python, and all experiments were performed on a MacBook 

Pro equipped w ith an Apple M3 Pro chip and 18 GB of RAM. 23 

The experiments presented in this section employ the variants of the SA algorithm 

described in Section 4.1 . While the general framework remains consistent across experiments, 

the evaluation procedure is adjusted based on the problem definition and the specific solution 

approach. Consequently, the primary algorithm parameters that define the SA are held constan t

throughout all experiments. Table 3 summarizes the values of these parameters, including those 

relevant to the adaptive version described in Section 4.3.3 . These values were determined 

through preliminary experiments and by considering value ranges commonly adopted in the 

literature. Additionally, for each experiment, 30 replications of the SA procedure were performed, 

and average values are reported in the subsequent sections.                       

> Table 3: Selected values for SA parameters.
> Parameter Symbol Value
> Base SA:
> Maximum number iterations −2000
> Number of iterations without improvement before reheating −100
> Initial temperature −1000
> Reheat temperature −500
> Initial cooling rate −0.99
> Interval for adaptive cooling rate (0.95, 0.999)
> Adaptive SA:
> Iterations between function update 𝑛 '100
> Solutions evaluated for function update 𝑛 (1
> Minimum iterations before function update 𝑛 )500
> Cap for parameters change 𝜃 0.1

5.1 Benchmarking based on the d eterministic problem 

The first set of experiments is designed to evaluate the performance of the basic version 

of the algorithm (𝑆 𝐴 :) on the deterministic version of the problem, for which we have detailed 

results in the literature . Specifically, we compare our approach to the state -of -the -art algorithm 

proposed by Zhang et al. [39] , who introduced an Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) 

algorithm to solve large instances of the SND with flexible service options. For this comparison, 

we adopt the problem denoted as 𝐿 + in Zhang et al. [39] , which corresponds to a scenario involving 

flexible trucks alongside scheduled train and barge services. This setup aligns with the 

deterministic problem described in Section 3.1 , with the additional conditions that all transport 

requests must be accepted and cannot be split across multiple routes. We modify our algorithm 

to fit this definition. Table 4 presents the comparison of results across instances ranging from 5 

to 1600 transport requests. For each instance, the table reports th e average cost of the best 

solutions obtained by the ALNS in Zhang et al. [39] , alongside the best and average costs 

achieved by 𝑆 𝐴 :, as well as the relative difference between the two methods. The results indicate 

that 𝑆 𝐴 : performs competitively, improving upon the solutions in most instances by a small 

margin , particularly in the larger ones . Additionally, a significant improvement in computational 24 

efficiency is observed. For example, in the largest instance involving 1600 transport requests, 

Zhang et al. [39] report requiring approximately 40 hours of computing time to obtain their best 

solutions. In contrast, 𝑆 𝐴 : is able to find its reported solution in under one minute. This highlights 

not only the effectiveness of the SA framework in exploring the solution space, but also the 

efficiency of the heuristic procedure employed to solve the routing subproblem and eval uate 

solutions.                                                                                         

> Table 4: Comparison of results for the deterministic problem.
> Instance
> (# of requests)
> Total cost ( EUR )
> Diff ( avg )Benchmark
> [39] 𝑺 𝑨 𝑯 (best) 𝑺 𝑨 𝑯 (avg)
> R-54269 4240 4262 -0.2%
> R-10 25 988 25 802 26 547 2.2%
> R-20 42 776 42 375 43 435 1.5%
> R-30 64 938 64 533 65 328 0.6%
> R-50 131 556 125 905 126 742 -3.7%
> R-100 176 277 171 955 172 929 -1.9%
> R-200 480 447 467 916 470 642 -2.0%
> R-400 1 109 777 1097 795 1099 892 -0.9%
> R-700 1 064 366 1046 949 1048 025 -1.5%
> R-1000 1 021 288 999 049 1000 174 -2.1%
> R-1300 1 053 422 1030 712 1031 501 -2.1%
> R-1600 1 031 410 1017 702 1018 497 -1.3%

5.2 Numerical experiments for the s tochastic problem 

Following the demonstration of the proposed solution approach’s strong performance on 

the deterministic problem, the next step is to evaluate its effectiveness in addressing the more 

complex stochastic problem. However, as no prior studies have investigate d this specific problem 

definition, there are no available results in the literature for direct comparison. Therefore, the 

experiments focus on testing and comparing the five algorithmic configurations proposed in 

Section 4.4 , using the deterministic versi on (𝑆 𝐴 :) as a baseline. 

5.2.1 Experiment al setting 

The experiments are conducted on the same benchmark instances used in the 

deterministic case. Specifically, four instances, with sizes ranging from 50 to 400 transport 

requests, are considered. These instances are based on the dataset presented by Zhang et al. 

[39] , from which the descriptions of the transport request sets are adopted. However, it was 

observed that the results on instance R -100 exhibited distinct trends compared to the others. To 

investigate the causes of this behavior , we made a new random selection of 100 transport 

requests from the overall set, which corresponds to the instance R -100’ in the following 

experiments. 25 

In addition, several problem elements are configured in accordance with the 

stochastic problem definition outlined in Section 3.2 . In this sense , different scenarios are 

designed to capture variability in road travel times and variations in the size of the available truck 

fleet. Table 5 summarizes the scenarios considered for the stochastic problem. Two distinct 

scenarios are defined for each factor, which are then combined to yield four scenarios in total .

Regarding travel time variability (see Section 3.2.1 ), the disruption component remains constant, 

modelled as a Poisson process with a mean interarrival time of 15 hours, durations uniformly 

dis tributed between 1 –10 hours, and severities uniformly distributed with a maximum severity 

factor ( 𝜂 ABC ) of 1 . On the other hand, the individual truck variability is modeled using a beta 

distribution that bounds the variability relative to the baseline travel time. The two variability 

scenarios (low and high) are created by adjusting the upper bound of the individual variation 

component ( 𝜀 D)E ), while 𝜀 D&+ is fixed at -0.1. Concerning the truck fleet size, the fleet is arbitrarily 

distributed across the physical network, and the total number of trucks is determined relative to 

the instance size by multiplying the number of transport requests by a fleet factor 𝜅 -"..* , therefore 

defining two scenarios (small and large fleet). It must be noted that in these experiments a 

homogeneous fleet is assumed, although the proposed methods could address instances with 

trucks with varying costs or speeds. Among the four resulting scenarios , 𝒱 FℱG represents a less 

constrained environment where the added complexity is expected to have minimal impact. 

Conversely, 𝒱 GℱF reflects a more constrained setting, in which the influence of variability and 

limited fleet size is anticipated to be more significant.                      

> Table 5:Considered scenarios for the stochastic problem.
> Scenario Description Parameter value
> 𝜀 +,-𝜅 .#//0
> 𝒱 1ℱ2low variability -large fleet 0.1 0.5
> 𝒱 2ℱ2high variability -large fleet 0.25 0.5
> 𝒱 1ℱ1low variability -small fleet 0.1 0.25
> 𝒱 2ℱ1high variability -small fleet 0.25 0.25

5.2.2 Comparison of SA variants 

In line with the definitions presented in Section 4.4 , a first set of experiments is conducted 

to evaluate the performance of five variants of the SA algorithm, namely: 𝑺𝑨 𝑯 , 𝑺 𝑨 𝑩 , S 𝑨 𝑭 , 𝑺 𝑨 𝑨 ,

and 𝑺 𝑨 𝑺 . For comparison purposes, the final best solution from each replication of the five SA 

settings is re -evaluated using the simulation model, and these values are reported. Moreover, 

each time the simulation model is employed, it is executed five times per solution, and the average 

cost results are used for the solutions objective function evaluation. Table 6 illustrates the 

comparative performance of the five SA settings across different instances and scenarios. For 

each combination of instance and scenario , the table presents the average profit (in euros) for 26 

the best solution found, as well as the average CPU time (in seconds), for each SA setting. From 

these results, multiple aspects can be discussed. 

Table 6: Comparison of results on multiple scenarios. 

Algorith 

m

Profit (€) CPU time (s) 

𝓥 1𝓕 2 𝓥 2𝓕 2 𝓥 1𝓕 1 𝓥 2𝓕 1 𝓥 1𝓕 2 𝓥 2𝓕 2 𝓥 1𝓕 1 𝓥 2𝓕 1

R-50: 

𝑆 𝐴 3 353 511 334 936 14 845 -326 163 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 

𝑆 𝐴 4 361 172 356 351 188 070 162 275 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 

𝑆 𝐴 5 359 092 354 748 315 693 317 492 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 

𝑆 𝐴 6 357 686 353 655 328 092 327 639 82.2 80.7 77.9 79.7 

𝑆 𝐴 7 369 727 365 673 350 116 344 515 63.7 65.9 49.8 50.1 

R-100: 

𝑆 𝐴 3 827 862 824 779 812 202 792 695 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 

𝑆 𝐴 4 825 871 824 274 813 271 814 437 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 

𝑆 𝐴 5 824 568 823 694 803 723 807 084 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 

𝑆 𝐴 6 812 878 809 316 812 021 814 236 79.9 78.5 79.4 78.3 

𝑆 𝐴 7 825 626 824 596 821 581 821 112 102.4 106.6 94.7 95.5 

R-100’: 

𝑆 𝐴 3 756 723 751 010 564 338 58 623 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 

𝑆 𝐴 4 760 734 758 207 629 000 486 989 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 

𝑆 𝐴 5 755 825 756 267 706 860 705 649 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 

𝑆 𝐴 6 750 430 750 142 730 507 724 399 78.5 78.3 77.9 78.0 

𝑆 𝐴 7 761 904 759 093 746 636 739 548 158.4 167.8 145.4 136.9 

R-200: 

𝑆 𝐴 3 1 527 763 1 505 518 -45 686 -1 247 808 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 

𝑆 𝐴 4 1 522 342 1 521 475 632 515 530 289 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 

𝑆 𝐴 5 1 502 628 1 502 931 1 348 591 1 341 008 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.3 

𝑆 𝐴 6 1 498 240 1 502 468 1 369 742 1 382 958 78.3 81.6 78.1 79.3 

𝑆 𝐴 7 1 522 030 1 521 432 1 471 319 1 459 091 793.6 806.3 539.9 572.8 

R-400: 

𝑆 𝐴 3 2 940 480 2 913 828 -6 386 460 -9 086 212 1.9 1.9 1.8 1.8 

𝑆 𝐴 4 2 914 474 2 913 795 -2 299 670 -2 546 095 1.6 1.6 1.8 1.6 

𝑆 𝐴 5 2 824 687 2 824 134 2 500 846 2 501 052 1.3 1.2 0.8 0.8 

𝑆 𝐴 6 2 839 357 2 761 760 2 565 300 2 561 040 78.7 79.6 79.2 78.3 

𝑆 𝐴 7 2 909 900 2 904 149 2 739 470 2 736 945 3057.6 3194.8 1857.1 1885.3 

Firstly, it is possible to draw conclusions regarding the impact of the added complexity 

introduced in the stochastic model (uncertain travel times and truck routing decisions). In 

scenarios with a large truck fleet ( 𝒱 FℱG and 𝒱 GℱG), the impact appears to be minimal as 

expected since we do not have scarcity of resources . This is evidenced by the lack of significant 

improvement when comparing the performance of 𝑆 𝐴 @ to 𝑆 𝐴 :. Furthermore, in these scenarios, 

𝑆 𝐴 = and 𝑆 𝐴 7 tend to perform slightly worse than 𝑆 𝐴 : or 𝑆 𝐴 ?, suggesting that explicitly modelling 

this complexity does not consistently yield benefits. Conversely, in scenarios with a small truck 

fleet ( 𝒱 FℱF and 𝒱 GℱF), the difference in performance becomes pronounced, particularly as 

instance size increases. In such cases, the performance of 𝑆 𝐴 : and 𝑆 𝐴 ? deteriorates substantially 

compared to 𝑆 𝐴 @. Indeed, for instance R -400, these simpler methods even yield solutions with 

negative profits. Regarding the different levels of travel time variability, no consistent significant 

effect is observed. Comparisons between 𝒱 FℱG and 𝒱 GℱG, as well as 𝒱 FℱF and 𝒱 GℱF, reveal 27 

minimal differences in outcomes. The only noticeable effect is the worse performance of 𝑆 𝐴 : in 

𝒱 FℱF compared to 𝒱 GℱF. However, this difference is mitigated when 𝑆 𝐴 ? is applied, indicating 

that the buffer alone greatly mitigates the negative impact of additional variability. It is worth noting 

that preliminary experiments did show substantial effects under unrealistically high variability or 

severe disruptions, but th ese scenarios are outside the scope of interest for this study. The case 

of instance R -100 further highlights the importance of the relative fleet size. The results reveal no 

significant advantage of 𝑆 𝐴 @ over 𝑆 𝐴 :, even in small fleet scenarios (unlike all other instances) .

Upon closer examination of this instance’s characteristics, it was found that, relative to other 

instances, the transport requests exhibited in average smaller sizes (in terms of the number of 

containers) and shorter distances between origin and destination. These features create a less 

constrained environment, reducing the demand for truck -hours relative to fleet capacity, with a 

similar effect to an in creased truck fleet. Indeed, when making a new random selection of 100 

transport requests (R -100’), whose characteristics are now in line with the instances of other 

sizes, the relative performance of the different algorithmic settings follow the same trends as for 

the other instances. 

Figure 4 provides another perspective to compare the quality of the solutions, displaying 

the variability of the profits for the scenario 𝒱 FℱF, instead of just the average between 

replications. The plots show that 𝑆 𝐴 : and 𝑆 𝐴 ?, besides generating worst solutions in average, 

have much less consistent results. On the other hand, 𝑆 𝐴 7 presents a slightly higher variability 

between replications compared to 𝑆 𝐴 = and 𝑆 𝐴 @, highlighting a potential aspect to improve in the 

adaptive method. Nevertheless, on these last three SA settings ( 𝑆 𝐴 =, 𝑆 𝐴 7, and 𝑆 𝐴 @) the variability 

is greatly reduced, showing the consistency of the proposed algorithms. In conclusion, the 

advantage of applying the more complex methods proposed in this paper depends on the instance 

characteristics. Nonetheless, the significant performance gains observed in small fleet scenarios 

justify the additional effort .

The results presented in Table 6 also show the strong performance of the learning -based 

algorithms (𝑆 𝐴 = and 𝑆 𝐴 7), particularly in small fleet scenarios ( 𝒱 FℱF and 𝒱 GℱF). While they tend 

to perform slightly worse than 𝑆 𝐴 @ in terms of solution quality, the observed gap, up to 10% for 

𝑆 𝐴 = and 7% for 𝑆 𝐴 7, is outweighed by the computational efficiency. Notably, as instance sizes 

grow, the computational time for 𝑆 𝐴 @ increases rapidly, whereas it remains relatively stable and 

significantly lower for the learning -based algorithms . Of course, when comparing the CPU time of 

the learning -based algorithms it is relevant to also take into account the training time. As 

discussed in Section 4.3.2 , the regression model was trained on ce for all the instances addressed 

in this paper. This was done with a pool of 19,500 solutions and the total training took 1113 s, of 28 

which most of the time corresponds to evaluate each solution with the simulation. Therefore, the 

training of the model took less computing time than one execution of 𝑆 𝐴 @ for the largest instance 

(R-400), and the difference would be larger if larger instances are addressed. Therefore, even if 

re -training was necessary to address instances based on a different physical network, for large 

instances the proposed learning -based method is expected to be faster , particularly if multiple 

experiments will be executed .

(a) R -50 (b) R -100 

(c) R -100’ (d) R -200 

(e) R -400 

Figure 4: Comparison of objective function value on scenario 𝓥 1𝓕 1.

Note: The y -axis scale varies across plots to better reflect the range of values for each instance.     

> V-F---SA_H V-F---SA_B V-F---SA_F V-F---SA_A V-F---SA_S
> Profit (10 3 €)

-1000 

-800 

-600 

-400 

-200 

0

200 

400 

600 

𝑆 𝐴 ! 𝑆 𝐴 " 𝑆 𝐴 # 𝑆 𝐴 $ 𝑆 𝐴 % V-F---SA_H V-F---SA_B V-F---SA_F V-F---SA_A V-F---SA_S 

> Profit (10 3 €)

0

100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

600 

700 

800 

900 

𝑆 𝐴 ! 𝑆 𝐴 " 𝑆 𝐴 # 𝑆 𝐴 $ 𝑆 𝐴 %    

> V-F---SA_H V-F---SA_B V-F---SA_F V-F---SA_A V-F---SA_S
> Profit (10 3 €)

-100 

0

100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

600 

700 

800 

𝑆 𝐴 ! 𝑆 𝐴 " 𝑆 𝐴 # 𝑆 𝐴 $ 𝑆 𝐴 % V-F---SA_H V-F---SA_B V-F---SA_F V-F---SA_A V-F---SA_S 

> Profit (10 3 €)

-2000 

-1500 

-1000 

-500 

0

500 

1000 

1500 

2000 

𝑆 𝐴 ! 𝑆 𝐴 " 𝑆 𝐴 # 𝑆 𝐴 $ 𝑆 𝐴 %    

> V-F---SA_H V-F---SA_B V-F---SA_F V-F---SA_A V-F---SA_S
> Profit (10 3 €)

-10000 

-8000 

-6000 

-4000 

-2000 

0

2000 

4000 

𝑆 𝐴 ! 𝑆 𝐴 " 𝑆 𝐴 # 𝑆 𝐴 $ 𝑆 𝐴 %29 

Table 7: Comparison of solution characteristics on scenario 𝓥 1𝓕 1.

Algorithm Profit components (x10 3€) Selected 

requests 

Mode share Truck 

hours 

Booked 

capacity 

Used 

capacity Total 𝓡 𝑪 𝒕𝒓𝒔 𝑪 𝒕𝒓𝒇 𝑪 𝒔𝒕𝒓 𝑪 𝒅𝒆𝒍 𝝈 𝑹 𝝈 𝑴 𝝈 𝑺 

R-50: 

𝑆 𝐴 3 14.8 478.7 64.2 37.8 6.1 355.7 0.96 0.07 0.38 0.55 1234 220 0.96 

𝑆 𝐴 4 188.1 476.0 59.9 39.0 5.1 183.9 0.95 0.03 0.42 0.55 900 221 1.00 

𝑆 𝐴 5 315.7 383.7 33.6 30.3 2.0 2.1 0.77 0.04 0.31 0.66 339 159 1.00 

𝑆 𝐴 6 328.1 408.3 39.4 32.5 2.3 6.0 0.82 0.03 0.33 0.64 444 171 1.00 

𝑆 𝐴 7 350.1 437.7 47.5 34.1 2.8 3.2 0.88 0.07 0.34 0.59 665 185 1.00 

R-100: 

𝑆 𝐴 3 812.2 999.7 95.6 74.0 3.5 14.3 1.00 0.04 0.23 0.73 1377 406 0.98 

𝑆 𝐴 4 813.3 998.3 97.4 74.4 3.2 10.0 1.00 0.03 0.23 0.74 1298 405 0.99 

𝑆 𝐴 5 803.7 956.3 79.7 70.2 2.5 0.2 0.96 0.02 0.20 0.78 673 374 1.00 

𝑆 𝐴 6 812.0 971.7 84.3 72.1 2.7 0.6 0.97 0.02 0.21 0.77 769 388 0.99 

𝑆 𝐴 7 821.6 992.7 93.1 73.9 3.2 0.8 0.99 0.03 0.23 0.74 1093 401 0.99 

R-100’: 

𝑆 𝐴 3 564.3 980.0 145.3 70.5 5.6 194.2 0.98 0.10 0.29 0.61 2469 490 0.93 

𝑆 𝐴 4 629.0 979.7 148.0 72.1 5.1 125.5 0.98 0.08 0.31 0.61 2219 488 0.95 

𝑆 𝐴 5 706.9 876.7 99.6 65.5 3.5 1.2 0.88 0.02 0.25 0.73 770 429 1.00 

𝑆 𝐴 6 730.5 920.0 113.2 68.4 3.5 4.5 0.92 0.05 0.26 0.69 1185 448 0.98 

𝑆 𝐴 7 746.6 966.0 139.8 71.9 4.2 3.5 0.97 0.07 0.30 0.63 1821 484 0.96 

R-200: 

𝑆 𝐴 3 -45.7 1943.3 252.4 150.8 27.2 1558.6 0.97 0.08 0.39 0.53 5891 829 0.93 

𝑆 𝐴 4 632.5 1934.3 248.7 154.1 23.2 875.8 0.97 0.06 0.41 0.54 4833 827 0.96 

𝑆 𝐴 5 1348.6 1636.7 150.1 128.1 9.6 0.3 0.82 0.02 0.31 0.68 1450 686 0.99 

𝑆 𝐴 6 1369.7 1680.7 159.0 132.5 11.2 8.3 0.84 0.02 0.33 0.65 1757 702 0.99 

𝑆 𝐴 7 1471.3 1859.3 213.0 150.4 17.7 6.9 0.93 0.03 0.41 0.56 3403 790 0.99 

R-400: 

𝑆 𝐴 3 -6386.5 3842.7 612.4 277.3 92.3 9247.1 0.96 0.12 0.38 0.50 17110 1497 0.93 

𝑆 𝐴 4 -2299.7 3765.3 557.6 278.0 63.1 5166.3 0.94 0.10 0.38 0.52 12971 1474 0.96 

𝑆 𝐴 5 2500.8 3026.0 282.8 225.9 16.2 0.3 0.76 0.05 0.28 0.67 3267 1237 1.00 

𝑆 𝐴 6 2565.3 3142.7 308.0 236.6 18.0 14.7 0.79 0.05 0.31 0.64 4193 1277 1.00 

𝑆 𝐴 7 2739.5 3457.7 421.0 263.7 26.3 7.2 0.86 0.07 0.38 0.55 7849 1375 0.99 

Notation: Total profits ; revenue ( 𝓡 ); transit cost ( 𝑪 𝒕𝒓𝒔 ) (including road transport train/barge services) ; transfer 

cost ( 𝑪 𝒕𝒓𝒇 ); storage cost ( 𝑪 𝒔𝒕𝒓 ); delay penalties ( 𝑪 𝒅𝒆𝒍 ); proportion of available requests that are selected ;

proportion of requests transported solely by road ( 𝝈 𝑹 ); proportion of requests transported only by train/barge 

scheduled services ( 𝝈 𝑺 ); proportion of requests transported via a multimodal path ( 𝝈 𝑴 ); total truck hours driven 

(both empty and loaded) ; total capacity booked in train/barge services (measured in container*km) ; ratio of 

booked capacity that is effectively used. 

Overall, these findings highlight the capability of the learning -based approaches to 

address more complex, constrained problem settings. However, it is important to analyze the 

performance gap between the proposed learning -based algorithms ( 𝑆 𝐴 = and 𝑆 𝐴 7) relative to 𝑆 𝐴 @

in greater detail, and this can be done by looking in more detail some characteristics of the 

solutions found by each SA setting. Table 7 displays some characteristics of the solutions found 

by each algorithm for scenario 𝒱 FℱF. By examining the cost components, it is evident that the 

poorer performance of 𝑆 𝐴 : and 𝑆 𝐴 ? is largely attributable to high delay penalty costs. This results 

from their tendency to select more transport requests, which cannot subsequently be fulfilled on 

time due to the limited truck fleet, as the basic evaluation heuristic used in these methods does 

not account for fleet size constraints. In contrast, 𝑆 𝐴 =, 𝑆 𝐴 7, and 𝑆 𝐴 @ select fewer requests, 

successfully minimising delay penalties. However, 𝑆 𝐴 = and 𝑆 𝐴 7 appear overly conservative, 30 

selecting fewer requests to such an extent that the income reduction is not compensated by the 

reduction in costs. This explains the performance gap relative to 𝑆 𝐴 @, and also why they may 

underperform 𝑆 𝐴 : in large fleet scenarios ( 𝒱 FℱG and 𝒱 GℱG). Addressing this conservativeness 

signals a potential approach for improving the learning -based algorithms. 

Table 7 further highlights other notable characteristics of the solutions produced by the 

different methods, such as the modal split. Due to the underlying physical network and scheduled 

services, the share of transport requests fulfilled solely by road ( 𝜎 J) is generally low, typically 

under 10%. However, this ratio is even lower In the solutions generated by 𝑆 𝐴 = and 𝑆 𝐴 7, and to 

a lesser extent 𝑆 𝐴 @, and it is interesting to note that reduction is not compensated by multimodal 

transport ( 𝜎 K), but instead by paths using only train and barge scheduled services ( 𝜎 @). This 

shows how the proposed learning -based algorithms prioritize the selection of requests that can 

be served by these services. A similar trend is observed in the total truck hours, which are 

significantly lower in solutions generated by 𝑆 𝐴 = and 𝑆 𝐴 7. Additionally, while these methods book 

slightly less capacity on scheduled train and barge services, the relative decrease is moderate. 

Importantly, 𝑆 𝐴 =, 𝑆 𝐴 7, and 𝑆 𝐴 @ yield solutions where the booked capacity is effectively utilised. In 

contrast, particularly in larger instances, 𝑆 𝐴 : and 𝑆 𝐴 ? produce solutions where up to 7% of 

booked capacity remains unused due to missed connections and insufficient truck availability to 

implement recovery plans. These findings demonstrate that the proposed algorithms not only 

reduce overall costs and delay p enalties but can also be used to obtain solutions with a more 

efficient use of the available capacities. 

5.2.3 Managerial insights 

The aforementioned results provide several practical insights for LSPs. Firstly, they 

highlight how relatively simple methods can be combined in an adaptive decision -making 

framework to efficiently address complex problems , such as the stochastic SND . Moreover, it is 

crucial to identify when it is necessary to explicitly model operational complexity and select the 

solution techniques accordingly. For example, in our problem definition, the use of the simulation 

models and the learning techniques seems only relevant when the truck availability is highly 

constrained , i.e. under scarce capacity . Similarly, it is likely that in extended problem definitions, 

that for example include more sources of uncertainty, more sophisticated metaheuristic s or ML 

techniques will be required. Overall, selecting the right techniques aiming for fast solution 

methods is relevant even at tactical or strategic level , as they enable managers to run what -if 

scenarios . For example, our model assumes a high degree of flexibility in terms of the re -planning 

routing decisions to face disruptions , while in practice this is not always possible . Such 31 

experiments can be used to test different scenarios and quantify the potential gains and costs of 

adding extra flexibility and guide the efforts accordingly. Moreover, it is interesting to note that the 

algorithm solutions do not select all the available requests . Instead, the solutions reach a balance 

in the reward from accepting more requests and the associated risk of facing delays. The model 

can be used to explore in more detail this trade -off, and similarly to explore which routes to 

prioritize, both i n terms of the selected demand and the services in which to book capacity. Finally, 

it is important to note that although in this work the simulation insights and the surrogate model 

were used to address the SND problem, this approach could be extended to other tactical 

problems with similar operational settings, providing manage rs with versatile tools to evaluate 

complex trade -offs and design more resilient transport plans. 

# 6 Conclusions 

This paper presents a n adaptive simulation -based optimization framework to tackle the 

SND under uncertain travel times, addressing several key gaps identified in the literature. 

Specifically, the proposed approach integrates both tactical and operational decision -making 

processes, allowing for a realistic representa tion of cascading effects of delays and dynamic re -

planning decisions. In particular, the model aims to maximize the profits for a n LSP within a 

multimodal logistics network. A n SA algorithm serves as the primary metaheuristic to efficiently 

explore the so lution space at the tactical level, while the operational problem is modelled through 

a detailed discrete -event simulation. This simulation accounts for variability in road travel times 

due to disruptions and individual truck -level uncertainties, providing a more realistic assessment 

of operational o utcomes. However, evaluating each candidate solution through full simulation 

incurs significant computational costs, especially for large -scale instances. To mitigate this, we 

introduce a regression function as surrogate model that predicts delay penalties based on key 

attributes of candidate solutions. Furthermore, an adaptive mechanism is incorporated within the 

SA framework, enabling the periodic refinement of the regression function based on simulation 

results collected during the optimization process. 

The experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed approach. For the 

deterministic version of the problem, the SA algorithm yields competitive results, outperforming 

existing benchmarks both in solution quality and computational efficiency. Fo r the stochastic 

problem, the learning -based methods provide a good balance between solution quality and 

computational time. The advantages are particularly clear in instances with more constrained 

truck fleets , i.e., when there is scarcity in capacity . Ne vertheless, results reveal less benefit in less 

constrained scenarios, i.e., with a surplus of resources, where the deterministic version of the 

algorithm already performs good. In fact, the conservative bias of the regression function in the 32 

selection of requests may lead to slightly worse results. This suggests a way to improve the 

methods by considering more details of the instance characteristics. Overall, the results 

demonstrate that although the used techniques are relatively simple in their respective domains 

(optimization and ML), the adaptive framework used to integrate them provides a robust method 

to tackle efficiently this complex version of the stochastic SND. Moreover, the computational 

overhead associated with training the learning component is modest relative to the solution time 

of large instances, and the model can be reused across instances defined on the same physical 

network. Therefore, e ven if re -training is requi red for instances based on different networks, the 

approach remains practically scalable. 

There are several future research paths to improve the proposed methods and its 

applicability. Firstly , the problem definition can be extended to incorporate additional sources of 

uncertainty, such as fluctuating demand or service capacities, provid ing a more realistic and 

comprehensive modeling framework and analysis. Secondly , the simulation model could be 

expanded to include the interactions and negotiation dynamics among multiple logistics 

stakeholders, such as shippers, carriers, and LSPs in a multi -ag ent setting . Exploring these 

aspects would contribute to a richer understanding of real -world logistics systems and further 

improve the applicability of the proposed framework. Thirdly, more advanced learning -based 

techniques, such as neural networks or inverse optimization methods, could be investigated and 

incorporated as surrogate models, to further enhance the accuracy of cost estimation without 

incurring excessive computatio n. The results presented in this paper demonstrate that the 

proposed algorithm, including the simple regression model, performs well and provides high -

quality solutions . Therefore, we consider such complex learning techniques unnecessary for the 

current problem formulation. Nonetheless, they may become valuable for extended problem 

variants, such as those incorporating additional uncertainties or multi -agent interactions. 

In summary, this paper demonstrates that the integration of simulation models with 

metaheuristic optimization and learning techniques provides a powerful and adaptive solution 

framework for addressing complex SND problems. The results highlight the significant potential 

of such approaches in developing efficient decision -support tools for real -world logistics 

operations characterized by uncertainty and operational complexity. 33 

# Acknowledgment 

Funded by the European Union (ERC, ADAPT -OR, No 101117675). Views and opinions 

expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the 

European Union or the European Research Council. Neither the European Union nor the granting 

authority can be held responsible for them. 

Declaration of generative AI and AI -assisted technologies in the manuscript preparation 

process 

During the preparation of this work the author(s) used ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2025) in order 

to improve the clarity and fluency of the writing. After using this tool/service, the author(s) reviewed 

and edited the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility for the content of the published 

article. 

# References 

[1] R. Elbert, J.P. Müller, J. Rentschler, Tactical network planning and design in multimodal 

transportation – A systematic literature review, Research in Transportation Business & 

Management 35 (2020) 100462. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rtbm.2020.100462. 

[2] T.G. Crainic, M. Hewitt, Service Network Design, in: Network Design with Applications to 

Transportation and Logistics, Springer, Cham, 2021: pp. 347 –382. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030 -64018 -7_12. 

[3] T.G. Crainic, W. Rei, 50 years of Operations Research for the tactical planning of 

consolidation -based freight transportation, EURO Journal on Transportation and Logistics 

14 (2025) 100157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejtl.2025.100157. 

[4] T. Delbart, Y. Molenbruch, K. Braekers, A. Caris, Uncertainty in Intermodal and 

Synchromodal Transport: Review and Future Research Directions, Sustainability 13 (2021) 

3980. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13073980. 

[5] M. Hrušovský, E. Demir, W. Jammernegg, T. Van Woensel, Hybrid simulation and 

optimization approach for green intermodal transportation problem with travel time 

uncertainty, Flex Serv Manuf J 30 (2018) 486 –516. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10696 -016 -

9267 -1. 

[6] S.B. Layeb, A. Jaoua, A. Jbira, Y. Makhlouf, A simulation -optimization approach for 

scheduling in stochastic freight transportation, Computers & Industrial Engineering 126 

(2018) 99 –110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2018.09.021. 

[7] J.P. Müller, R. Elbert, S. Emde, Integrating vehicle routing into intermodal service network 

design with stochastic transit times, EURO Journal on Transportation and Logistics 10 

(2021) 100046. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejtl.2021.100046. 

[8] M. Uddin, N. Huynh, Reliable Routing of Road -Rail Intermodal Freight under Uncertainty, 

Netw Spat Econ 19 (2019) 929 –952. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11067 -018 -9438 -6. 34 

[9] Y. Zhao, Q. Xue, Z. Cao, X. Zhang, A Two -Stage Chance Constrained Approach with 

Application to Stochastic Intermodal Service Network Design Problems, Journal of 

Advanced Transportation 2018 (2018) 6051029. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/6051029. 

[10] M. Deng, B. Bian, Y. Zhou, J. Ding, Distributionally robust production and replenishment 

problem for hydrogen supply chains, Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and 

Transportation Review 179 (2023) 103293. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2023.103293. 

[11] A. Ghavamifar, A. Makui, A.A. Taleizadeh, Designing a resilient competitive supply chain 

network under disruption risks: A real -world application, Transportation Research Part E: 

Logistics and Transportation Review 115 (2018) 87 –109. 

https://doi.org/10.10 16/j.tre.2018.04.014. 

[12] S. Ghanei, I. Contreras, J. -F. Cordeau, A two -stage stochastic collaborative intertwined 

supply network design problem under multiple disruptions, Transportation Research Part 

E: Logistics and Transportation Review 170 (2023) 102944. 

https://doi.org/10.10 16/j.tre.2022.102944. 

[13] K. Govindan, H. Gholizadeh, Robust network design for sustainable -resilient reverse 

logistics network using big data: A case study of end -of -life vehicles, Transportation 

Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 149 (2021) 102279. 

https://doi. org/10.1016/j.tre.2021.102279. 

[14] R. Saedinia, B. Vahdani, F. Etebari, B. Afshar Nadjafi, Robust gasoline closed loop supply 

chain design with redistricting, service sharing and intra -district service transfer, 

Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 123 (2019) 121 –141. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2019.01.015. 

[15] M. Hewitt, T.G. Crainic, M. Nowak, W. Rei, Scheduled service network design with 

resource acquisition and management under uncertainty, Transportation Research Part B: 

Methodological 128 (2019) 324 –343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2019.08.008. 

[16] X. Xiang, T. Fang, C. Liu, Z. Pei, Robust service network design problem under uncertain 

demand, Computers & Industrial Engineering 172 (2022) 108615. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2022.108615. 

[17] C. Liu, S. Lin, Z. -J.M. Shen, J. Zhang, Stochastic service network design: The value of 

fixed routes, Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 174 

(2023) 103118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2023.103118. 

[18] Z. Wang, M. Qi, Robust Service Network Design Under Demand Uncertainty, 

Transportation Science 54 (2020) 676 –689. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2019.0935. 

[19] A.T. Richter, S. Stiller, Robust Strategic Route Planning in Logistics, Transportation 

Science 52 (2018) 38 –58. 

[20] A. Baubaid, N. Boland, M. Savelsbergh, The Value of Limited Flexibility in Service Network 

Designs, Transportation Science 55 (2021) 52 –74. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2020.1009. 

[21] G. Lanza, T.G. Crainic, W. Rei, N. Ricciardi, Scheduled service network design with quality 

targets and stochastic travel times, European Journal of Operational Research 288 (2021) 

30 –46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2020.05.031. 

[22] Y. Bengio, A. Lodi, A. Prouvost, Machine learning for combinatorial optimization: A 

methodological tour d’horizon, European Journal of Operational Research 290 (2021) 405 –

421. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2020.07.063. 

[23] M. Karimi -Mamaghan, M. Mohammadi, P. Meyer, A.M. Karimi -Mamaghan, E. -G. Talbi, 

Machine learning at the service of meta -heuristics for solving combinatorial optimization 

problems: A state -of -the -art, European Journal of Operational Research 296 (2022) 393 –

422. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2021.04.032. 

[24] R. Bai, Chen ,Xinan, Chen ,Zhi -Long, Cui ,Tianxiang, Gong ,Shuhui, He ,Wentao, Jiang 

,Xiaoping, Jin ,Huan, Jin ,Jiahuan, Kendall ,Graham, Li ,Jiawei, Lu ,Zheng, Ren ,Jianfeng, 

Weng ,Paul, Xue ,Ning, H. and Zhang, Analytics and machine learning in vehicle routing 35 

research, International Journal of Production Research 61 (2023) 4 –30. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2021.2013566. 

[25] N. Giuffrida, J. Fajardo -Calderin, A.D. Masegosa, F. Werner, M. Steudter, F. Pilla, 

Optimization and Machine Learning Applied to Last -Mile Logistics: A Review, Sustainability 

14 (2022) 5329. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14095329. 

[26] J. Sui, S. Ding, X. Huang, Y. Yu, R. Liu, B. Xia, Z. Ding, L. Xu, H. Zhang, C. Yu, D. Bu, A 

survey on deep learning -based algorithms for the traveling salesman problem, Front. 

Comput. Sci. 19 (2025) 1 –30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11704 -024 -40490 -y. 

[27] R. Shahbazian, L.D.P. Pugliese, F. Guerriero, G. Macrina, Integrating Machine Learning 

Into Vehicle Routing Problem: Methods and Applications, IEEE Access 12 (2024) 93087 –

93115. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3422479. 

[28] C. Wang, S. Ma, B. Zha, B. Ma, Surrogate -Accelerated Evolutionary Algorithm for Solving 

Electric Vehicle Routing Problems, IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification 11 

(2025) 3524 –3537. https://doi.org/10.1109/TTE.2024.3443515. 

[29] C. Rüther, J. Rieck, A Bayesian Optimization Approach for Tuning a Grouping Genetic 

Algorithm for Solving Practically Oriented Pickup and Delivery Problems, Logistics 8 (2024) 

14. https://doi.org/10.3390/logistics8010014. 

[30] P. Zattoni Scroccaro, P. van Beek, P. Mohajerin Esfahani, B. Atasoy, Inverse Optimization 

for Routing Problems, Transportation Science (2024). 

https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2023.0241. 

[31] M. Morabit, G. Desaulniers, A. Lodi, Learning to repeatedly solve routing problems, 

Networks 83 (2024) 503 –526. https://doi.org/10.1002/net.22200. 

[32] C. Spieckermann, S. Minner, M. Schiffer, Reduce -then -Optimize for the Fixed -Charge 

Transportation Problem, Transportation Science 59 (2025) 540 –564. 

https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2023.0407. 

[33] Y. Sun, A. Ernst, X. Li, J. Weiner, Generalization of machine learning for problem reduction: 

a case study on travelling salesman problems, OR Spectrum 43 (2021) 607 –633. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00291 -020 -00604 -x. 

[34] R. Asín -Achá, A. Espinoza, O. Goldschmidt, D.S. Hochbaum, I.I. Huerta, Selecting fast 

algorithms for the capacitated vehicle routing problem with machine learning techniques, 

Networks 84 (2024) 465 –480. https://doi.org/10.1002/net.22244. 

[35] R. de la Torre, C.G. Corlu, J. Faulin, B.S. Onggo, A.A. Juan, Simulation, Optimization, and 

Machine Learning in Sustainable Transportation Systems: Models and Applications, 

Sustainability 13 (2021) 1551. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13031551. 

[36] K. Tsolaki, T. Vafeiadis, A. Nizamis, D. Ioannidis, D. Tzovaras, Utilizing machine learning 

on freight transportation and logistics applications: A review, ICT Express 9 (2023) 284 –

295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icte.2022.02.001. 

[37] Y. Zhang, A. Heinold, F. Meisel, R.R. Negenborn, B. Atasoy, Collaborative planning for 

intermodal transport with eco -label preferences, Transportation Research Part D: Transport 

and Environment 112 (2022) 103470. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2022.103470. 

[38] W. Guo, B. Atasoy, W.B. van Blokland, R.R. Negenborn, A dynamic shipment matching 

problem in hinterland synchromodal transportation, Decision Support Systems 134 (2020) 

113289. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2020.113289. 

[39] Y. Zhang, W. Guo, R.R. Negenborn, B. Atasoy, Synchromodal transport planning with 

flexible services: Mathematical model and heuristic algorithm, Transportation Research 

Part C: Emerging Technologies 140 (2022) 103711. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2022.10 3711.