Title: BEVPredFormer: Spatio-temporal Attention for BEV Instance Prediction in Autonomous Driving

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02930v1

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 00:40:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# BEVPredFormer: Spatio-temporal Attention for BEV Instance Prediction in Autonomous Driving 

## Miguel Antunes-Garc´ ıa 1, Santiago Montiel-Mar´ ın 1, Fabio S´ anchez-Garc´ ıa 1,Rodrigo Guti´ errez-Moreno 1, Rafael Barea 1, Luis M. Bergasa 1

> 1

RobeSafe Research Group, Department of Electronics, University of Alcal´ a, Alcal´ a de Henares, Madrid, Spain. Contributing authors: miguel.antunes@uah.es; santiago.montiel@uah.es; fabio.sanchezg@uah.es; rodrigo.gutierrez@uah.es; rafael.barea@uah.es; luism.bergasa@uah.es; 

Abstract 

A robust awareness of how dynamic scenes evolve is essential for Autonomous Driving systems, as they must accurately detect, track, and predict the behaviour of surrounding obstacles. Traditional perception pipelines that rely on modular architectures tend to suffer from cumulative errors and latency. Instance Prediction models provide a unified solution, performing Bird’s-Eye-View segmen-tation and motion estimation across current and future frames using information directly obtained from different sensors. However, a key challenge in these models lies in the effective processing of the dense spatial and temporal information inherent in dynamic driving environments. This level of complexity demands architectures capable of capturing fine-grained motion patterns and long-range dependencies without compromising real-time performance. We introduce BEVPredFormer , a novel camera-only architecture for BEV instance prediction that uses attention-based temporal processing to improve temporal and spatial comprehension of the scene and relies on an attention-based 3D pro-jection of the camera information. BEVPredFormer employs a recurrent-free design that incorporates gated transformer layers, divided spatio-temporal attention mechanisms, and multi-scale head tasks. Additionally, we incorporate a difference-guided feature extraction module that enhances temporal representations. Extensive ablation studies validate the effectiveness of each architectural component. When evaluated on the nuScenes dataset, BEVPredFormer was on par or surpassed State-Of-The-Art methods, highlighting its potential for robust and efficient Autonomous Driving perception. Code will be available at github.com 

Keywords: Instance Prediction, Autonomous Driving, BEV Perception, nuScenes 

# 1 Introduction 

A robust understanding of the ego-vehicle sur-rounding scene is essential for any advanced Autonomous Driving (AD) system, which involves diverse goals such as estimating the position and predicting the intentions of other dynamic actors in the scene. Traditionally, perception architec-tures have addressed these tasks using a series of dedicated modules performing complementary functions, such as 3D object detection, multi-object tracking, and future motion prediction. Although effective, this multi-stage approach can 1

> arXiv:2604.02930v1 [cs.CV] 3 Apr 2026

introduce cumulative errors and additional pro-cessing latencies. By contrast, Instance Prediction models [1] offer a more comprehensive solution by performing Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) segmenta-tion and motion estimation for current and future frames simultaneously. This approach provides a unified BEV map showing the positions and move-ments of different instances, obtained directly from raw sensor data. This integrated approach simplifies the complex perception pipeline and inherently captures the spatio-temporal context. AD instance prediction methods often rely on data from multiple sensors, such as cam-eras, LiDAR, and RADAR, to capture a detailed view of the surrounding environment of the vehi-cle. When using image information, features need to be projected from image space into a BEV representation [2, 3]. This provides a more struc-tured, spatially consistent format for sensor fusion and further processing. To understand how the scene changes over time, these models process a sequence of past frames, which requires a tempo-ral module to capture motion and dependencies over time. Several approaches have been explored. These include 2D and 3D convolution-based methods [1, 4], which efficiently capture spatial-temporal features across sequences of frames. Additionally, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), such as LSTM or GRU [5], sequentially process past frames and model long-range dependencies. Attention-based modules [6] further enable mod-els to dynamically focus on relevant regions or features across different frames, improving their ability to handle complex temporal relationships effectively. Finally, the output is obtained using dedicated prediction heads. The specific design and output of these heads vary depending on the method. While simple designs such as PowerBEV [4] use only segmentation and flow outputs, other models, such as Fiery [1], include additional heads to predict centerness or offsets for more precise object-level processing. The work discussed in this paper introduces 

BEVPredFormer , a State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) architecture designed for instance prediction in the BEV space. Incorporating attention-based temporal processing, BEVPredFormer enhances the vehicle’s understanding of its environ-ment. Unlike recurrent-based approaches such as StretchBEV [5], our architecture adopts arecurrent-free design in the temporal processing module in order to improve parallelisation and computational efficiency. Based on PredFormer [7], the proposed method uses gated transformer layers to process BEV temporal information through divided spatial and temporal attention mechanisms. PredFormer uses attention mecha-nisms to perform video prediction on sequences of images. It leverages multiple alternating and com-bined spatial and temporal attention layers [8] to capture the dynamic scene evolution. BEVPred-Former adapts this concept by modifying the attention encoder to operate on a sequence of BEV feature maps extracted using a BEVFormer-based BEV projection block. This adaptation enables the model to learn temporal dependen-cies and spatial relationships effectively in the BEV domain, thereby enhancing its ability to predict future states in autonomous driving sce-narios. The gated transformer layers further refine this process by selectively controlling the flow of temporal information to improve robustness and reduce noise in long-range predictions. To further enhance the temporal representation, we incor-porate a module designed to extract difference features [9] between the BEV features extracted from consecutive input frames. To enable accurate future prediction, a multi-scale prediction module [4, 9] projects temporally enriched features into future time steps. The main contributions of this study are sum-marised below: 

• BEVPredformer , a new camera-only BEV Instance Prediction architecture, is proposed. 

• In order to process the input sequence BEV features, the architecture uses a temporal processing block based on divided tempo-ral and spatial attention, incorporating gated transformer layers. 

• Extensive ablation studies are performed at each stage of the architecture to check the influence on the overall performance. 

• Performance evaluation and SOTA compari-son are performed on the nuScenes autonomous driving dataset, surpassing SOTA perfor-mance .22 Related Work 

## 2.1 Multi-camera BEV Perception 

Multi-camera setups are frequently employed in autonomous driving (AD) systems due to their lower cost compared to other sensors such as LiDAR or RADAR, and their ability to provide complete coverage of the vehicle’s surroundings with high semantic density. Consequently, archi-tectures that focus on the transformation of the information present in the different camera planes into a common BEV representation are crucial to achieve a more complete understanding of the scene. A common BEV representation has a com-putational complexity advantage over other fully 3D approaches, such as those usually employed for dense tasks such as 3D Occupancy Prediction. Additionally, it facilitates the fusion with features from other sensors if available. The camera BEV projection methods can be divided into different groups depending on how they project the infor-mation: depth-based or Forward Projection, and attention-based or Backwards Projection. Depth-based methods rely on estimating depth maps for each camera to perform the corre-sponding feature projection. This methodology was introduced in Lift-Splat-Shoot (LSS) [2], which performs a categorical depth distribution for each feature position and projects them into a frustrum-shaped region in the final BEV space. BEVDet [10] builds on this concept, aiming to build a simpler modular BEV segmentation archi-tecture. The authors also focus on addressing the overfitting problem present by introducing data augmentation techniques in the BEV space rather than only on the image plane. BEVDepth [11] focuses on reducing depth estimation errors to enhance the camera BEV representation, uti-lizing an additional module for estimating the depth values and incorporating a LiDAR sensor to perform additional supervision during training. To further enhance scene context understanding, BEVDet4D [12] incorporates temporal processing into its architecture. Initially, multiple past and present BEV feature maps are generated, followed by a spatio-temporal alignment to ensure effec-tive information fusion. This approach is crucial in instance prediction architectures, in which the temporal information is essential to generate the future motion data for each vehicle. On the other hand, attention-based projection methods rely on attention mechanisms to estab-lish correspondence between the BEV space and the different camera feature maps. BEVFormer [3] introduces a BEV encoder layer that pulls information from the multi-camera system into the BEV queries using a cross-attention module. A BEV query self-attention block is responsi-ble for further processing temporal information. BEVFormerV2 [13] focuses more on temporal pro-cessing, maintaining the cross-attention module to project the image features and substituting the temporal self-attention block with a tempo-ral encoder that fuses multiple past BEV feature maps. Both BEVFormer and BEVFormerV2 try to alleviate the computational burden of the atten-tion mechanism using Defformable Attention [14]. To further reduce the complexity of the trans-former layers, other approaches employ a sparse approach, where instead of processing every BEV position, only the important ones are processed. SparseBEV [15] introduces Scale-Adaptive self-attention to encode the different BEV queries with different receptive fields and a Adaptative Mix-ing block to efficiently mix and process relevant BEV features. PointBEV [16] proposes a sparse architecture with a two step inference process. The first step involves a coarse inference, which iden-tifies and processes relevant features in the scene. Subsequently, a second fine pass is responsible for processing only the areas surrounding the selected anchor points, enhancing the performance and results. Approaches such as FB-BEV or FB-OCC [17, 18] employ both projection techniques, per-forming a forward-backwards transformation to achieve a better BEV representation. HENet [19] introduces a dual-stream encoder that processes two types of temporal inputs. Firstly, a long-term sequence at lower resolution is processed to provide a broader temporal context. Secondly, a short-term sequence with higher-resolution images and a deeper encoder is utilised to capture fine spatial details. Different SOTA evaluations suggest that attention-based methods generally outperform depth-based approaches, especially when high-resolution input images are available, since they facilitate more accurate feature extraction and spatial reasoning. However, hybrid meth-ods that combine depth and attention mech-anisms can introduce significant computational 3overhead, impacting performance. In this con-text, BEVPredformer offers a more streamlined approach by utilising the attention-based projec-tion mechanism of BEVFormer, thus bypassing the need for depth estimation modules. This design choice also enables direct compensation for ego-motion, as the model generates the 3D grid query positions while taking into account the ego-vehicle movement. 

## 2.2 Vehicle Future Prediction 

2.2.1 Motion Prediction 

Conventional SOTA motion prediction pipelines adopt a multi-stage approach, initially detecting objects in the scene to identify the different agents, followed by tracking to associate these agents across frames. Once tracked, the past trajectories of each agent are used as input to a prediction module that forecasts their future positions, in meters, over a short time horizon. CratPred [20] relies on a GNN-based architecture to process and model interactions between different actors within a scene. Similarly, HEAT [21] incorporates HD Map information into the graph. Recent methods employ attention mechanisms to capture the interactions between the agents. Attention-GAN [22] first uses a self-attention module to process the social interactions, and then utilises a GAN module to generate the different future trajectories. VectorNet [23] directly incor-porates vectorised information from both scene context and agent behaviour, constructing an attention-based interaction graph. [24] proposes an efficient baseline that encodes the social infor-mation through a GNN and attention module, also incorporating map information. Other proposed architectures address the task of motion prediction using an end-to-end, fully dif-ferentiable design, where the latent state of one stage is passed as the input to the next one. This enables the system to be trained jointly, improv-ing the flow of information across modules. For example, End2End [25] performs motion predic-tion in a two-stage setup, where the detection features and states are processed in the second stage. UniAD [26] extends this idea to build a com-plete autonomous driving system that integrates detection, tracking, and prediction in a unified framework. DeTra [6] combines LiDAR and map data in a single-stage model to directly gener-ate future trajectory proposals without requiring intermediate steps. 

2.2.2 Instance Prediction 

In contrast to motion prediction, instance pre-diction focuses on forecasting the future state of the full scene in BEV format, often including seg-mentation, occupancy masks, and motion fields. This BEV representation divides the scene into a fixed grid that includes information about the state, instance id and motion for each cell. These approaches predict the evolution of every instance in the scene directly from the sensor information, being particularly useful for dense forecasting and planning. Fiery [1] laid the foundations of instance pre-diction methods. It uses a multi-camera sensor setup to generate BEV segmentation maps with a probabilistic approach. BEVerse [27] uses acommon spatio-temporal BEV encoder to pro-cess past information and relies on multiple heads to perform various tasks, including instance pre-diction. StretchBEV [5] introduces a stochastic latent-space update approach that processes pre-dictions in space and time, enhancing the diver-sity and accuracy of longer-term BEV forecasts. PowerBEV [4] simplifies the process of predicting instances by generating BEV segmentation and flow outputs directly, without the need for addi-tional outputs such as centerness or offset heads. Fast And Efficient [28] follows this simplified approach, focusing on reducing the computational cost and model complexity of the temporal pro-cessing and specialised prediction heads. DMP [9] enhances the temporal representation by introduc-ing a difference-guided motion module. Our proposed architecture performs future instance prediction directly from raw sensor data in BEV format, enabling dense and structured scene forecasting. It captures the full dynamics of the environment by predicting segmentation, occupancy and motion fields for each grid cell, without relying on intermediate representations as required by a motion prediction multi-stage architecture. 

## 2.3 Camera Temporal Processing 

Temporal processing is essential for modelling motion and dynamic changes across frames in 4camera-based perception. These methods improve the consistency and accuracy of scene understand-ing over time by leveraging information from past inputs. Existing approaches can be categorised as either recurrent or recurrent-free, with different trade-offs in terms of efficiency and performance. Recurrent approaches such as VMamba [29] and SwinLSTM [30] model temporal dependen-cies by processing sequences of features frame by frame, maintaining a hidden state across time. VMamba introduces efficient sequence modelling using Mamba layers, while SwinLSTM combines the spatial modelling power of Swin Transformers with recurrent temporal updates for better video understanding. To improve parallelisation and performance, recurrent-free approaches process all input frames concurrently. TimeSformer [8] applies factorised space-time attention to video sequences, improv-ing spatio-temporal comprehension and reduc-ing computational costs. The DMVFN [31] uses a lightweight routing module to predict future frames. This module adaptively selects motion-specific subnetworks, enabling multi-scale voxel flow modelling with reduced computation while maintaining high accuracy. Predformer [7] intro-duces Gated Transformer Blocks to enhance tem-poral learning by modulating the influence of spa-tial and temporal tokens. Following the factorised attention approach of TimeSformer, this method uses different combinations of spatial and tem-poral attention blocks to encode the information. These attention-based approaches have demon-strated robust performance in modelling such dependencies, facilitating more expressive and context-aware representations. BEVPredFormer builds on this concept by applying attention mech-anisms to past BEV features, thereby enhancing temporal reasoning and improving the quality of the generated predictions. 

# 3 Method 

The overall layout of BEVPredFormer, is repre-sented in Fig. 1. The main components of the architecture are: 1) Image feature extraction using a backbone and neck. 2) A view transform based on self and cross attention. 3) A Sparse UNet block to further process BEV features. 4) A temporal block focused on exploiting temporal relations and patterns. 5) Multiple multi-scale predictor heads. BEVPredFormer relies only on the vehicle localisation and a multi-camera system as input sources. The location history of the vehicle is used to compensate for ego-motion throughout the input sequence, aligning all observations into a common reference frame. The sequence of images 

I ∈ RTin ×Nc×3×Him ×Wim is the primary source of environmental information, where Tin denotes the number of input frames in the sequence, Nc is the number of cameras in the setup, and Him × Wim 

represents the image resolution. The final objective is to predict an instance-level map P ∈ RTout ×H×W for Tout future frames. This map is obtained from two intermediate representations: the backwards flow map F ∈

RTout ×2×H×W , which captures per-pixel motion in the BEV plane, and the semantic segmenta-tion map S ∈ RTout ×Nc×H×W , where Nc = 2denotes the number of semantic classes: vehicles and background. The BEV feature map resolution 

H × W is fixed to 200 × 200 cells throughout the architecture. As depicted in Fig. 1, the sequence of multi-camera images I is processed by a shared fea-ture extractor and a neck that fuses multi-scale features. A BEVFormer architecture is used to project past information into the BEV space F .First, the BEV queries QBEV are processed by a self-attention module, and then the final cam-era features are projected into the BEV plane by a cross-attention module. A Sparse UNet block is then responsible for further refinement. Next, the temporal module enhances the representation of temporal information by first calculating and adding the difference features, and then process-ing the BEV feature sequence using PredFormer blocks, to obtain the final BEV features F BEV temporal .Two multi-scale heads are responsible for project-ing into future frames and extracting flow F and segmentation S maps, which will be needed to obtain the final instance prediction P

## 3.1 Feature extraction 

The first stage of BEVPredFormer focuses on extracting features from the input data. In com-plex architectures, reaching a balance between accuracy and computational efficiency is crucial. SOTA models often use backbones such as Effi-cientNet [32] or Swin Transformer [33]. BEVPred-Former uses EfficientViT [34] as backbone, which 5Fig. 1 BEVPredFormer proposed architecture 

has been specifically designed to maximise the efficiency of attention blocks through a cascaded group attention mechanism. The input consists of a sweep of six cam-eras I, with each image processed indepen-dently. EfficientViT extracts multi-scale feature maps for each image with downsampling fac-tors of 8 and 16, and channel dimensions of 128 and 256, respectively. A neck module then combines each group of multi-scale fea-tures to create a unified feature representation for each respective image, resulting in the final extracted features, IF ∈ R(Tin ∗Nc)×CF ×HF ×WF .This module includes an upsampling layer to align the spatial features, followed by two convolu-tion–normalisation–activation blocks. 

## 3.2 BEV Projection and refinement 

The second module of the architecture (stage 2 in Fig. 1) is responsible for projecting all the information extracted from the input images into a unified BEV representation, which is spatially aligned with the real-world 3D environment. By transforming multi-view image features into atop-down, flattened space, the model enhances spatial reasoning and temporal alignment across frames while reducing computational complexity. The projection block in BEVPredFormer is based on BEVFormer, using attention mechanisms to model the relationship between images and BEV planes. First, a set of learnable BEV queries QBEV ∈

RTin ×CBEV ×H×W is processed by a self-attention module that focuses on extracting spatial depen-dencies. Secondly, image features are aggregated into the BEV space through a cross-attention mechanism. In this process, each query corre-sponds to a point in the predefined 3D BEV grid. Each grid position is first projected onto the image plane using the corresponding intrinsic and extrin-sic parameters. The projected points are then used to sample relevant features from the multi-view image feature maps. The cross-attention module then facilitates interaction between these sam-pled features and the BEV queries, aggregating spatially aligned visual information from multi-ple views into the BEV representation. Finally, an FFN block processes the aggregated temporal and spatial information. This sequence of self-attention, cross-attention and FFN is repeated 

NBEV times, obtaining the past BEV features 

FBEV ∈ RTin ×CBEV ×H×W . Following the cross-attention projection, the BEV features are pro-cessed further using a Sparse UNet module (stage 3 in Fig. 1). This component improves the rep-resentation by capturing local and global spatial dependencies through downsampling and upsam-pling paths with skip connections. The multi-scale aggregation enables the model to reason more effectively about object shapes and spatial context across the BEV map, obtaining a new set of BEV features F BEV processed .6F BEV T - 1     

> Conv + LReLU 1x1 Conv
> + Max Pool 1x1 Conv 1x1 Conv + Max Pool Softmax
> 1x1 Conv
> Upsample
> FBEV T - 2 FBEV T

Fig. 2 Difference module architecture present in the temporal block of BEVPredFormer 

## 3.3 Temporal module 

BEVPredFormer incorporates a temporal module that focuses on exploiting the temporal relations between the different BEV states of the previ-ous and current frames. This stage is divided into two fundamental blocks: a difference module and a PredFormer encoder. 

3.3.1 Difference module 

BEVPredFormer incorporates a difference module similar to the one presented in DMP. The architec-ture, represented in Fig. 2, begins by computing difference features as the frame-wise subtraction of consecutive BEV feature maps from the input sequence T , T − 1 and T − 2. These differ-ence features capture temporal variations in the scene, which are often caused by moving objects. To highlight regions with significant changes, an additional weighting mechanism assigns greater value to areas with large difference features. These weights are then combined with the original dif-ference features and then upsampled to obtain 

F BEV dif f , the corresponding past BEV features with enhanced flow representation. 

3.3.2 PredFormer blocks 

After the motion-guided refinement stage, the pro-posed architecture uses the implementation of PredFormer blocks represented in Fig. 3a to pro-cess the sequence of past BEV difference-guided feature maps. PredFormer, which was originally designed for video prediction, specialises in cap-turing spatiotemporal dependencies by combining spatial and temporal self-attention within gated transformer layers. In our adaptation, these blocks use the BEV difference feature maps F BEV dif f as input, enabling the modelling of temporal con-sistency and cross-frame context directly in BEV space. This enables the network to learn dynamic patterns and improve prediction performance over time. First, the BEV feature map is divided into non-overlapping patches by a patch embedding layer and projected into a lower-dimensional token sequence, reducing computational overhead. Next, a set of prediction queries Qpred is prepared for attention, either as learned embeddings or as linear projections of F BEV dif f . Absolute sinu-soidal positional encodings are then added to these tokens to preserve spatial coherence across the map. The transformer-based PredFormer block is applied multiple times in sequence to capture com-plex spatio-temporal dependencies. Similarly to the original PredFormer, in order to improve the flow of the information inside the temporal pro-cessing, the attention uses a Gated Transformer Block (GTB), substituting the Multi-Layer Per-ceptron (MLP) with a Gated Linear Unit (GLU). Finally, an upsampling layer is added to repro-ject the processed tokens back into the full spatial map scale to restore the original BEV resolution and generate the final feature map F BEV temporal ∈

RTin ×CBEV ×H×W .As shown in Fig. 3b, PredFormer blocks sup-port multiple attention configurations, breaking down spatio-temporal processing into distinct spa-tial and temporal stages. This divided attention strategy improves learning efficiency and perfor-mance by separating the spatial structure from the temporal dynamics. During our experiments, Linear Patch Embed Positional Encoding Upsample PredFormer Encoder    

> FBEV temporal
> FBEV diff
> a) PredFormer temporal block b) PredFormer attention types xN Temporal Attention Spatial Attention Binary-TS xN Temporal Attention Spatial Attention Temporal Attention Triplet-TST Temporal Attention Spatial Attention Temporal Attention Spatial Attention xN Quad-TSST

Fig. 3 Temporal attention architecture . a) Over-all diagram of spatio-temporal processing. b) PredFormer attention types 

7we found that applying temporal attention first slightly improves accuracy. This is why our archi-tecture focuses on three specific configurations: Binary-TS, Triplet-TST and Quadruplet-TSST. 

## 3.4 Flow and segmentation heads 

The final temporally enhanced BEV features 

F BEV temporal are then passed to the final stage of the architecture to make the final prediction. In line with the approach proposed in [4], our method produces two output representations: a backwards optical flow map F ∈ RTout ×2×H×W and a seman-tic segmentation map S ∈ RTout ×Nc×H×W .The backwards flow map F represents the dis-placement of each pixel towards the centre of the same instance in the previous frame. This for-mulation mitigates errors in propagation that are more likely to occur when using forward flow, particularly when there are fast-moving objects or occlusions present. The segmentation map S

captures the occupancy of the BEV grid, indicat-ing which cells are occupied by vehicles in each predicted future frame. A post-processing step is applied to obtain the final instance prediction map, P = P (S, F ). For each predicted frame, the segmentation map S is used to identify the BEV positions occupied by vehicles, acting as a spatial mask. At the same time, the backwards flow map F is used to prop-agate instance IDs from the last predicted frame through the output sequence. In terms of head structure, we adopt a multi-scale approach [4, 9], composed of an encoder that uses F BEV temporal to generate features at differ-ent scales, a predictor module that projects each scale into future space Tout , and a decoder that fuses all future information for the final prediction. As explained in section 4.1, the number of out-put maps Tout depends on the number of seconds into the future that are being predicted. During training, we use two lightweight auxiliary heads to incorporate additional supervision, predicting centerness and offset maps. 

# 4 Experiments 

## 4.1 Implementation and datasets 

To perform a fair comparison with other SOTA methods, the experiments are conducted on the nuScenes dataset [35], following the official split of 1,000 driving scenes: 700 for training, 150 for validation and 150 for testing. All performance metrics are reported on the validation set. The dataset provides sensor data at a frequency of 2 Hz, and our evaluation is restricted to objects that are categorised as vehicles . In terms of the temporal configuration, we follow the standard conventions of state-of-the-art architectures by using input information from the present moment and one second in the past to make predictions two seconds into the future. With a frame rate of 2 Hz, this corresponds to three input frames Tin = 3 and four output frames Tpred = 4, needing two addi-tional future frames to initialise and propagate instance representations Tout = Tpred + 2 = 6. We adopt a fixed BEV resolution of H×W = 200 ×200 and CBEV = 128 channels. The experiments con-sider two spatial ranges: a short range of 15 meters and a long range of 50 metres from the ego vehi-cle. The temporal module uses a patch size of 4 to process the BEV features 

## 4.2 Metrics and losses 

The different experiments follow the state-of-the-art evaluation methodology and report on two primary metrics: Intersection over Union (IoU) and Video Panoptic Quality (VPQ). The IoU metric, defined in Eq. 1, is a stan-dard metric used to evaluate segmentation per-formance. In the context of BEV prediction, the IoU measures the overlap between the predicted and ground truth vehicle occupancy maps for each subsequent frame. The overall IoU metric is obtained by averaging the IoU for both the present and future Tpred frames . This makes it possible to evaluate the accuracy with which the model iden-tifies the spatial extent of objects in the scene. However, IoU is limited to per-frame evaluations and does not consider the temporal consistency of instance predictions. IoU = 1

Tpred + 1 

> Tpred

X

> t=0

ˆyseg  

> t

∩ yseg 

> t

ˆyseg  

> t

∪ yseg 

> t

(1) To address this limitation, this study employs VPQ, which is defined in Eq. 2, and extends the traditional Panoptic Quality (PQ) metric to video. VPQ evaluates the quality of instance predictions over time by considering detection, segmentation (Segmentation Quality) and identity consistency 8(Recognition Quality). VPQ penalises fragmented tracks or inconsistent segmentations of the same object across frames, making it particularly well-suited to evaluating temporal models. VPQ = 

> Tpred

X

> t=0

P 

> (pt,q t)∈T P t

IoU( pt, q t)

|T P t| + 12 |F P t| + 12 |F N t| (2) In addition to flow and segmentation, two auxiliary tasks are also supervised during train-ing to improve the prediction performance. The segmentation task Lseg uses a cross-entropy loss computed over the 25% most confident pixels, which reduces the influence of noisy predictions and dominant background. Flow is trained using a smooth L1 loss Lf low to provide a balance of robustness and precision in motion estimation. The Centerness loss Lcenter is optimised using a mean squared error (MSE) loss, while per-pixel offsets Lof f are trained using an L1 loss. All loss components are combined in Eq. 3 using dynamic weighting, which allows the model to adaptively balance the contribution of each task during training. 

L = 1

Tout 

 Tout −1X

> t=0

(λ1Lseg + λ2Lflow 

+ λ3Loff + λ4Lcenter )



(3) 

## 4.3 Results 

The architecture is trained using a two-stage pro-cess. The first stage involves adapting the image feature extractor and BEV projection components to the nuScenes dataset. For this purpose, the model is trained for 50 epochs to perform BEV segmentation on the current frame without mak-ing any predictions. The input is the same past sequence data used for the full task, maintaining compatibility with the temporal setup of the sec-ond phase. In the second stage, the focus shifts to predicting future instances. The pre-trained weights from the first stage, corresponding to the image feature extractor, BEV projector and Sparse UNet, are loaded and kept frozen. The remaining modules are then trained for an addi-tional 50 epochs. This staged approach results in faster convergence during the temporal training phase, improving final prediction accuracy. BEVPredFormer model is trained on multi-ple NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 80 GB of VRAM. The experiments use the AdamW optimiser with a maximum learning rate of 3 · 10 e−4, scheduled using the One Cycle learning rate policy. Unless otherwise specified, all input images are resized to a resolution of 448 × 800 as part of the pre-processing pipeline. To improve the robust-ness and generalisation of the model, we apply several data augmentation techniques: 1) Ran-dom zoom and rotation are applied to the input multi-camera images. 2) Random translations and rotations are applied in the BEV representation coherently across the entire input sequence in order to preserve spatial and temporal consistency. Table 1 compares BEVPredFormer with instance prediction SOTA models, which are all benchmarked in the nuScenes dataset. The evalu-ated methods use different backbones, with most relying on EfficientNet variants for image encod-ing, whereas BEVPredFormer uses EfficientViT. Most SOTA approaches project image features into 3D space using BEV transformations based on LSS, which rely on depth estimation and volumetric projection. By contrast, BEVPred-Former builds on BEVFormer to perform a direct 2D-to-BEV transformation, eliminating the need for explicit depth estimation and resulting in more efficient and structured BEV representa-tions. BEVPredFormer achieves SOTA results across all key metrics. For long-range instance pre-diction, it obtains a VPQ score of 33.3, which is comparable to the score obtained by BEVerse and surpassed only by DMP, which lacks an official open-source implementation. In terms of segmen-tation accuracy, BEVPredFormer achieves an IoU of 40.9, outperforming all other methods that were compared. In the short-range setting, it reaches a VPQ score of 54.9 and an IoU score of 63.9 Fig. 4 shows the results of BEVPredFormer on a set of nuScenes validation scenarios using a short-range configuration. The black box at the center represents the ego vehicle position in the present frame. Fig. 4a shows that the model correctly predicts a moving vehicle on a curved road, following the ego-vehicle. Fig. 4b shows that BEVPredFormer can accurately segment all parked vehicles on both sides and a moving vehicle in the opposite direction in rainy weather. Fig. 4c 9Table 1 Comparative model performance on nuScenes validation set 

Architecture Code Encoder View Transf. Long range Short range VPQ ↑ IoU ↑ VPQ ↑ IoU ↑

PowerBEV [4] a ✓ EfficientNet Lift-Splat 32.2 38.9 55.5 62.5 Fiery [1] ✓ EfficientNet Lift-Splat 29.9 36.7 50.2 59.4 StrechBEV [5] ✓ EfficientNet Lift-Splat 29.0 37.1 46.0 55.5 BEVerse [27] a ✓ Swin Lift-Splat 33.3 38.7 52.2 60.3 ST-P3 [36] ✓ EfficientNet Lift-Splat 32.0 38.9 - -FaE [28] ✓ EfficientNet Lift-Splat 29.8 37.4 53.7 59.1 DMP [9] ✗ Swin Lift-Splat + Attn. 34.0 38.8 57.5 62.9 BEVPredFormer ✓ EfficientViT BEVFormer 33.3 40.9 54.9 63.9  

> a

Metrics obtained using the corresponding official model implementation. shows the model’s prediction of a complex urban scenario, correctly identifying moving vehicles in both directions and a right turn at the intersec-tion. However, in Fig. 4d, the model correctly segments all vehicle instances but fails to predict long-term future movement. On the other hand, Fig. 5 shows the results obtained using the long-range configuration of BEVPredFormer. Figure 5a shows the correct pre-diction of medium and long-range vehicles at every point in the intersection. Figures 5b and 5c illus-trate urban scenarios with accurate segmentation and prediction of parked, moving and turning vehicles at all distances from the ego vehicle. Finally, Fig. 5d shows that BEVPredFormer can struggle with long-term prediction in some cases, particularly when the vehicle is far from the ego vehicle. 

## 4.4 Ablation study 

Tab. 2 summarises the impact of different tempo-ral attention configurations on the overall model performance when the patch size is fixed at 4, resulting in an effective BEV resolution of 50, and two temporal attention blocks are used. Using any form of temporal attention improves the architec-ture’s predictive capabilities, particularly in the long-range setting. For example, using Binary-TS attention results in gains of 0.4 in VPQ and 0.2 in IoU. More sophisticated temporal attention mech-anisms, such as Triplet-TST, can further enhance performance, with improvements of up to 0.7 in VPQ and 0.4 in IoU. In the short-range scenario, however, VPQ improvements are less pronounced, with a maximum increase of just 0.2 observed when using Quadruplet-TSST attention. However, IoU gains remain significant, reaching up to 0.6. The experiments also indicate that the difference module enhances the BEV feature representation, improving the VPQ and IoU scores by 0.2 and 0.3, respectively, in the long-range evaluation and by 0.5 and 0.1 in the short-range evaluation. Both evaluations were performed using the Triplet-TST method. These results emphasise the importance of temporal modelling for accurate instance pre-diction, particularly in long-range scenarios where motion dynamics are more challenging.                                

> Table 2 Temporal module block type comparative performance
> Block type Long range Short range VPQ ↑IoU ↑VPQ ↑IoU ↑
> -32.5 40.5 54.8 63.4
> Binary TS 32.9 40.7 54.9 63.8
> Triplet TST a33.0 40.6 54.4 63.8
> Triplet TST 33.3 40.9 54.9 63.9
> Quad. TSST 33.3 40.8 55.0 64.0
> All experiments with patch size 4 and 2 blocks.
> aTemporal module without difference block.

Tab. 3 shows how changing the number of tem-poral attention blocks affects the overall perfor-mance of the model. All configurations correspond to the complete BEVPredFormer model, with the only difference being the number of temporal processing blocks used. In all experiments, the temporal attention pattern is fixed to Triplet-TST 10 Fig. 4 BEVPredFormer results with short range. Different highlighted areas represent the same object in the camera and BEV                        

> Table 3 Long range performance comparison of the number of temporal processing blocks
> N block VPQ ↑IoU ↑Flops (G) Par (M) 132.7 40.5 248 6.7
> 233.3 40.9 295 9.9
> 433.1 40.9 390 16.2
> 633.2 41.1 485 22.5 All experiments use Triplet TST block with patch size 4.

to isolate the impact of block depth. Increasing the number of blocks from one to two results in the largest performance gains, with improvements of 0.6 in VPQ and 0.3 in IoU. However, adding more blocks beyond this point leads to smaller improve-ments. For example, increasing from two to four blocks only improves IoU by 0.1, while intro-ducing nearly 100 additional GFLOPs and 6.3 million parameters. Therefore, using two temporal blocks offers the best balance between prediction performance and computational efficiency. Tab. 4 illustrates the impact of input image resolution on the model’s overall performance. Following common practices in the literature on 11 Fig. 5 BEVPredFormer results with long range. Different highlighted areas represent the same object in the camera and BEV                 

> Table 4 Input image size performance impact
> Resolution VPQ ↑IoU ↑Latency (ms) ↓
> 224x480 31.0 38.8 170 448x800 33.3 40.9 220
> 640x1600 33.3 40.9 360 Results for long-range evaluation using Triplet TST temporal model.

detection and prediction, we evaluate three resolu-tions: the original nuScenes resolution, 640 ×1600; the half-resolution of 448 ×800, which is used in most experiments; and a low-resolution setting of 224 ×480. Image resolution plays a critical role in BEVFormer-based architectures due to its impact on the quality of the 3D projection. Higher-resolution images result in denser projections that cover more BEV cells with richer spatial detail. However, this comes at a substantial computa-tional cost, which has a particularly significant impact on the runtime of the image feature extrac-tor. In BEVPredFormer, increasing the resolution from the lowest setting to 448 ×800 substantially improves long-range prediction, with both VPQ and IoU rising 2 points, increasing latency by 12 50 ms. However, further increasing the resolution to the original 640 ×1600 only provides marginal gains while significantly reducing inference speed, with a total inference time of 360 ms. This demon-strates that 448 ×800 is a practical compromise between accuracy and latency. 

# 5 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduce BEVPredFormer, a novel architecture for future instance prediction in BEV space. Our method uses temporal attention modules and multi-scale decoding alongside a two-stage training strategy to efficiently fuse past BEV features and make accurate instance-level predic-tions over time. By adapting modules such as PredFormer to operate on BEV difference-guided feature maps, we can capture the spatio-temporal dynamics of traffic scenes effectively. We conducted extensive ablation studies to explore the impact of different types of tempo-ral attention, the number of attention blocks and the resolution of the input image. The results show that even lightweight temporal processing improves performance, particularly for long-range predictions. Using two Triplet TST attention blocks strikes the best balance between perfor-mance and computational efficiency. Furthermore, we found that increasing the input resolution improves segmentation quality, but this comes at the expense of inference time. BEVPredFormer achieves competitive results on the nuScenes dataset when compared to other SOTA approaches. Despite relying on a different BEV projection strategy than methods based on LSS, it matches or surpasses existing methods in VPQ and IoU, particularly in long-range scenar-ios. Qualitative results confirm that our model accurately predicts vehicle motion in a variety of complex traffic situations. Overall, BEVPredFormer establishes a robust and effective foundation for future instance pre-diction in the BEV domain, setting the stage for temporally consistent, scene-aware and semantics-guided models in autonomous driving. 

Acknowledgements. This work has been supported by the Spanish PID2021-126623OB-I00 project, funded by MICIN/AEI and FEDER, TED2021-130131A-I00 project from MICIN/AEI and the European Union NextGenerationEU/PRTR, PLEC2023-010343 project (INARTRANS 4.0) from MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033, and R&D activity program TEC-2024/TEC-62 (iRoboCity2030-CM), ELLIS Unit Madrid granted by the Community of Madrid and Spanish MICIU through a FPU grant. 

# Declarations 

Conflict of interest. On behalf of all the authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest. 

Code availability. Once published, the code will be available at GitHub. 

# References 

[1] Hu, A., Murez, Z., Mohan, N., Dudas, S., Hawke, J., Badrinarayanan, V., Cipolla, R., Kendall, A.: FIERY: Future instance segmentation in bird’s-eye view from sur-round monocular cameras. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (2021) [2] Philion, J., Fidler, S.: Lift, splat, shoot: Encoding images from arbitrary camera rigs by implicitly unprojecting to 3d. In: Proceed-ings of the European Conference on Com-puter Vision (2020) [3] Li, Z., Wang, W., Li, H., Xie, E., Sima, C., Lu, T., Qiao, Y., Dai, J.: Bevformer: Learning bird’s-eye-view representation from multi-camera images via spatiotemporal transform-ers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.17270 (2022) [4] Li, P., Ding, S., Chen, X., Hanselmann, N., Cordts, M., Gall, J.: Powerbev: A power-ful yet lightweight framework for instance prediction in bird’s-eye view. In: Elkind, E. (ed.) Proceedings of the Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-23, pp. 1080–1088. Inter-national Joint Conferences on Artificial Intel-ligence Organization, ??? (2023). https://doi. org/10.24963/ijcai.2023/120 . Main Track. 

https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2023/120 

13 [5] Akan, A.K., G¨ uney, F.: Stretchbev: Stretch-ing future instance prediction spatially and temporally. (2022) [6] Casas, S., Agro, B., Mao, J., Gilles, T., Cui, A., Li, T., Urtasun, R.: DeTra: A Uni-fied Model for Object Detection and Trajec-tory Forecasting (2024). https://arxiv.org/ abs/2406.04426 [7] Tang, Y., Qi, L., Xie, F., Li, X., Ma, C., Yang, M.-H.: Video prediction transformers without recurrence or convolution. In: arXiv Preprint Arxiv:2410.04733 (2024) [8] Bertasius, G., Wang, H., Torresani, L.: Is space-time attention all you need for video understanding? In: Proceedings of the Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) (2021) [9] Chen, Y., Lin, C., Duan, X., Zhou, J., Guo, K., Zhao, D., Cao, D., Tian, D.: Dmp: Difference-guided motion prediction for vision-centric autonomous driving. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 26 (6), 9094–9108 (2025) https://doi. org/10.1109/TITS.2025.3542265 [10] Huang, J., Huang, G., Zhu, Z., Yun, Y., Du, D.: Bevdet: High-performance multi-camera 3d object detection in bird-eye-view. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11790 (2021) [11] Li, Y., Ge, Z., Yu, G., Yang, J., Wang, Z., Shi, Y., Sun, J., Li, Z.: Bevdepth: Acquisi-tion of reliable depth for multi-view 3d object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10092 (2022) [12] Huang, J., Huang, G.: Bevdet4d: Exploit temporal cues in multi-camera 3d object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.17054 (2022) [13] Yang, C., Chen, Y., Tian, H., Tao, C., Zhu, X., Zhang, Z., Huang, G., Li, H., Qiao, Y., Lu, L., Zhou, J., Dai, J.: Bevformer v2: Adapt-ing modern image backbones to bird’s-eye-view recognition via perspective supervision. ArXiv (2022) [14] Xia, Z., Pan, X., Song, S., Li, L.E., Huang, G.: Vision Transformer with Deformable Attention (2022). https: //arxiv.org/abs/2201.00520 [15] Liu, H., Teng, Y., Lu, T., Wang, H., Wang, L.: Sparsebev: High-performance sparse 3d object detection from multi-camera videos. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 18580–18590 (2023) [16] Chambon, L., Zablocki, E., Chen, M., Bar-toccioni, F., Perez, P., Cord, M.: Pointbev: A sparse approach to bev predictions. In: CVPR (2024) [17] Li, Z., Yu, Z., Wang, W., Anandkumar, A., Lu, T., Alvarez, J.M.: FB-BEV: BEV repre-sentation from forward-backward view trans-formations. In: IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (2023) [18] Li, Z., Yu, Z., Austin, D., Fang, M., Lan, S., Kautz, J., Alvarez, J.M.: FB-OCC: 3D occu-pancy prediction based on forward-backward view transformation. arXiv:2307.01492 (2023) [19] Xia, Z., Lin, Z., Wang, X., Wang, Y., Xing, Y., Qi, S., Dong, N., Yang, M.-H.: HENet: Hybrid Encoding for End-to-end Multi-task 3D Perception from Multi-view Cameras (2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.02517 [20] Schmidt, J., Jordan, J., Gritschneder, F., Dietmayer, K.: Crat-pred: Vehicle trajec-tory prediction with crystal graph convolu-tional neural networks and multi-head self-attention. In: 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 7799–7805 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICRA46639.2022.9811637 [21] Mo, X., Huang, Z., Xing, Y., Lv, C.: Multi-agent trajectory prediction with het-erogeneous edge-enhanced graph attention network. IEEE Transactions on Intelli-gent Transportation Systems 23 (7), 9554– 9567 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS. 2022.3146300 14 [22] G´ omez-Hu´ elamo, C., Conde, M.V., Ortiz, M., Montiel, S., Barea, R., Bergasa, L.M.: Exploring attention gan for vehicle motion prediction. In: 2022 IEEE 25th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Sys-tems (ITSC), pp. 4011–4016 (2022). https: //doi.org/10.1109/ITSC55140.2022.9921804 [23] Gao, J., Sun, C., Zhao, H., Shen, Y., Anguelov, D., Li, C., Schmid, C.: Vector-Net: Encoding HD Maps and Agent Dynam-ics from Vectorized Representation (2020). https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.04259 [24] G´ omez-Hu´ elamo, C., Conde, M.V., Barea, R., Oca˜ na, M., Bergasa, L.M.: Efficient baselines for motion prediction in autonomous driving. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transporta-tion Systems 25 (5), 4192–4205 (2023) [25] Li, L.L., Yang, B., Liang, M., Zeng, W., Ren, M., Segal, S., Urtasun, R.: End-to-end contextual perception and predic-tion with interaction transformer. In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intel-ligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5784–5791 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/ IROS45743.2020.9341392 [26] Hu, Y., Yang, J., Chen, L., Li, K., Sima, C., Zhu, X., Chai, S., Du, S., Lin, T., Wang, W., Lu, L., Jia, X., Liu, Q., Dai, J., Qiao, Y., Li, H.: Planning-oriented autonomous driving. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2023) [27] Zhang, Y., Zhu, Z., Zheng, W., Huang, J., Huang, G., Zhou, J., Lu, J.: Beverse: Unified perception and prediction in birds-eye-view for vision-centric autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09743 (2022) [28] Antunes, M., Bergasa, L.M., Montiel-Mar´ ın, S., Barea, R., S´ anchez-Garc´ ıa, F., Lla-mazares, A.: Fast and efficient transformer-based method for bird’s eye view instance prediction. In: 2024 IEEE 27th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Sys-tems (ITSC), pp. 1269–1274 (2024). https:// doi.org/10.1109/ITSC58415.2024.10919912 [29] Liu, Y., Tian, Y., Zhao, Y., Yu, H., Xie, L., Wang, Y., Ye, Q., Jiao, J., Liu, Y.: VMamba: Visual State Space Model (2024). https:// arxiv.org/abs/2401.10166 [30] Tang, S., Li, C., Zhang, P., Tang, R.: SwinL-STM: Improving Spatiotemporal Prediction Accuracy using Swin Transformer and LSTM (2023). https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.09891 [31] Hu, X., Huang, Z., Huang, A., Xu, J., Zhou, S.: A Dynamic Multi-Scale Voxel Flow Net-work for Video Prediction (2023). https:// arxiv.org/abs/2303.09875 [32] Tan, M., Le, Q.: EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural net-works. In: Chaudhuri, K., Salakhutdinov, R. (eds.) Proceedings of the 36th Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 97, pp. 6105–6114. PMLR, ??? (2019). 

https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/tan19a.html 

[33] Liu, Z., Lin, Y., Cao, Y., Hu, H., Wei, Y., Zhang, Z., Lin, S., Guo, B.: Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10012–10022 (2021) [34] Liu, X., Peng, H., Zheng, N., Yang, Y., Hu, H., Yuan, Y.: Efficientvit: Memory effi-cient vision transformer with cascaded group attention. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2023) [35] Caesar, H., Bankiti, V., Lang, A.H., Vora, S., Liong, V.E., Xu, Q., Krishnan, A., Pan, Y., Baldan, G., Beijbom, O.: nuscenes: A multi-modal dataset for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.11027 (2019) [36] Hu, S., Chen, L., Wu, P., Li, H., Yan, J., Tao, D.: St-p3: End-to-end vision-based autonomous driving via spatial-temporal fea-ture learning. In: European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) (2022) 15