Title: 2603.18594v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.18594v1

Published Time: Fri, 20 Mar 2026 00:47:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
1

# Beyond the Main Mode 

# The contribution of access and egress trips in door -to -door travel 

Nejc Geržinič 

Department of Transport and Planning, Delft University of Technology 

n.gerzinic@tudelft.nl  or  nejcgerzinic@gmail.com 

Mark van Hagen 

NS Dutch Railways 

Hussein Al -Tamimi 

NS Dutch Railways 

Niels van Oort 

Department of Transport and Planning, Delft University of Technology 

Dorine Duives 

Department of Transport and Planning, Delft University of Technology 

# Abstract 

Access and egress trips constitute a substantial part of a train trip in minds of travellers, often being the 

deciding factor whether to travel by train at all.  Despite a host of studies analysing individual legs within 

a multimodal trip chain, the full chain within a multimodal trip  – including access, main and egress  – has 

seen very limited attention.  To understand the importance of all these choices, we use travel diaries from 

the Dutch Mobility Panel to estimate a nested logit  discrete choice  model.  Our  results suggest that  as a 

main mode,  train and bus/tram/metro (BTM) seem to be associated with an inherent disutility compared 

to walking, cycling or car. The in -vehicle time in train and BTM , however , seems to be perceived 

significantly less negatively (60% lower) than in private modes, making them comparatively more 

attractive for longer journeys.  These results imply that , given the strong preference for walking  for  both 

access and egress, train stations should be sufficiently  dense  to allow most  people  to walk to  a station. 

This, however, should not come at the expense of additional transfers, as they inflict substantial disutility. 

Operators  need to find a  balanc e between accessibility and directness. Given the strong dispreference 

of travelling by car to dense urban areas, these trips should be the primary target of policymakers and 

operators for attracting additional travellers to take the train. Future studies c ould further enhance our 

understanding of multimodal trips by including additional attribut es in the data, account for respondent 

heterogeneity and study how individuals build their consideration set when making multimodal trips. 

# Keywords 

Multimodal travel, Access/Egress trips, Train travel, Choice modelling, Revealed preference 

# 1 Introduction 

Using the  train  is associated with additional trips, in order to get to and from the train station. These 

are referred to as access (before the train trip) and egress (after the train trip) trips or trip legs . According 

to research, these access and egress trips represent a  substantial  reason  for the lower market share of 

train travel  (Brons et al., 2009; Keijer & Rietveld, 2000) . Krygsman et al. (2004)  define the share of time 

spent on access and egress trips in relation to the total door -to -door travel time as the interconnectivity 2

ratio . They show that for short trips (~30min), this ratio can be as high as 50%, and even for longer trips 

it  is  still 20 -30%.  Combining this with the fact that access and egress travel time tends to be valued 

more negatively  (Wardman, 2004) , the impact is even greater.  Hoogendoorn -Lanser et al. (2006)  suggest 

that despite making up less than 50% of the travel time, access and egress legs contribute around 2/3 

of the total disutility to the train trip. 

This suggests that a large part of the potential to  shift travellers from car to  train lies with in  the access 

and egress trips.  Many researchers suggest that a better integration of cycling (and other micromobility) 

with the train could tap this potential  (Martens, 2004, 2007; Rietveld, 2000) . Jonkeren & Huang (2024) 

show that up to 5% of car trips and 10% of car distance travelled  in the Netherlands  could feasibly be 

replaced with a combination of the bicycle and PT, with train making up  most of  the PT part  (>80%) .

And while these percentages may not seem substantial, they would constitute a doubling of the number 

of train trips .

Knowing that access/egress trips have a substantial impact on the choice to travel by train, while 

simultaneously also knowing there still is  large, untapped  potential in these multimodal trips, additional 

insights  for the complete  door -to -door  trip  may be  necessary.  Most studies  thus far have focused 

primarily on  the train (PT) trip  and often only studying individual trip legs within the train trip  (see 

Section  2). Our study adds to this bod y of knowledge by incorporating the various trip legs of a train 

trip and modelling the comprehensive door -to -door travel possibilities within a single model.  The goal 

of this paper is  to analyse the characteristics of (potential) train trips and include the  information of all 

the  individual  trip legs in a single  comprehensive  model, giving us valuable information on not only the 

perception and weight of the individual  legs, but also the relat ionships and trade -offs that travellers 

make between them when choosing how to travel. 

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: a  literature review  of  multimodal  public transport trips 

and door -to -door travel preferences  is presented in Section  2. The methodology adopted in this study 

is outlined in Section  3, with Section  4 providing a detailed description of the data processing required 

for the study. Section  5 then presents the main modelling outcomes , while Section  6 dives deeper into 

the results and analyses how individual attribute variation affects people’s choices.  Finally, the paper is 

summarised in Section  7.

# 2 State -of -the -art  on  multimodal trip chains 

The importance of station accessibility has spurred a host of research on how access and egress travel 

are perceived.  In this section, we provide an overview of studies that have analysed travel behaviour and 

traveller perception for different parts of the multimodal trip, including access/egress mode preference, 

travel time perception and  stop/ station choice.  Some studies also analyse multiple of the listed aspects, 

i.e. a joint access -mode and station -choice study. 

Modal preference  - On the topic of modal preference, most studies agree that walking, cycling and 

bus/tram/metro (BTM) dominate t rain station  access while walking and BTM are the modes of choice 

when  egress ing a train station  (Bovy & Hoogendoorn -Lanser, 2005; Geržinič et al., 2025; Halldórsdóttir 

et al., 2017; Keijer & Rietveld, 2000; La Paix Puello & Geurs, 2014; Molin & Timmermans, 2010) , with the 

specific context of the study influencing the exact order.  Cycling tends to be a more popular means of 

access (and egress) in countries with more cycling culture, like the Netherlands  (Bovy & Hoogendoorn -

Lanser, 2005; Keijer & Rietveld, 2000; La Paix Puello & Geurs, 2014)  and Denmark  (Halldórsdóttir et al., 

2017) , whereas walking and even shared micromobility or ride -hailing are more common in places  with 

a less developed cycling culture.  (Azimi et al., 2021) .3

Travel distance  - Comparing access trips for train versus BTM,  Shelat et al. (2018)  report that passengers 

are willing to travel further to access a train station than a BTM stop . Conversely however, the tipping 

point between choosing to walk or cycle is higher for BTM access, i.e. people would switch from walking 

to cycling at an access distance of 1.5km for a BTM stop but only 1km for a train station.  The authors 

hypothesise that this could primarily be based on the bicycle parking facilities, which are much better 

at train stations, while being very minimal at BTM stops. 

In -vehicle time  - When considering the perception of in -vehicle time (IVT), the time spent access ing  and 

egressing the stations tends to be perceived as more negative than time in the main mode. According 

to research, the scale of the main (train) IVT ranges from equal  (Montes et al., 2023) , to 50% lower 

(Geržinič et al., 2023) , with most studies reporting a value of ~25% -30% below the access/egress IVT 

(Bovy & Hoogendoorn -Lanser, 2005; van Mil et al., 2021) . Montes et al. (2023)  report an equal IVT for 

all trip legs, but find vastly different perception of costs per leg, effectively resulting in a higher 

willingness -to -pay for travel time improvements on the access/egress legs.  Geržinič et al. (2023)  on the 

other hand  report that the majority of travellers do not perceive train IVT differently from access IVT. 

Station choice  - Having carried out an extensive literature review on station choice,  Young & Blainey 

(2018)  find limited studies looking at mode -specific IVT on the access mode and outline this as a future 

research av enue.  Bovy & Hoogendoorn -Lanser (2005)  do report separate IVT perception, with private 

modes (walk, bicycle, car)  being associated with more a negative IVT perception , whereas BTM and train 

IVT are almost indistinguishable.  In contrast,  La Paix Puello & Geurs (2014)  find car IVT to be least 

negative, followed by BTM, cycling and walking as most negative.  The same order, but then in terms of 

distance rather than time, is also concluded by  Debrezion et al. (2009) , although this is likely related to 

the average speeds of each mode, with the distance being more negative for slower -speed modes .

Joint access -mode -and -station choice  - Access/egress mode choice is often taken together with the 

station choice.  As summarised by  Young & Blainey (2018) , factors like train travel time, frequency, fare 

and number of transfers all influence station choice, which in turn influences  access  mode choice. 

Modelling this choice jointly  shows that  travellers are willing to make a longer access trip in exchange 

for improvements in the quality of the main leg.  Travel time tends not to be a major factor, since train 

IVT is lower than access IVT, so any increase in access travel time would have to be compensated by 

substantially reduced train travel time.  What most st udies  investigate  is transfer avoidance; passengers 

may be willing to travel further, to a well -connected central station rather than their local station . Here 

too, the trade -offs differ between studies, with  van Mil et al. (2021)  and  Yap et al. (2024)  reporting a 

trade -off of only 5min of access time or 8min of train time to avoid a transfer. On the other hand, 

Geržinič et al. (2023)  and  De Bruyn et al. (2023)  report a willingness to travel an additional 20 -30min by 

train to avoid a transfer . Geržinič et al. (2023)  also  valued transfers against access time, showing that 

individuals are willing to travel  10 -20min  more, to a more distant station, if it means they have one 

transfer less on their train trip .

Although these studies investigate a wide array of attributes in multimodal train trips, most focus on a 

specific part of the trip, such as access/egress exclusively  (Azimi et al., 2021; Halldórsdóttir et al., 2017; 

La Paix Puello & Geurs, 2014; Shelat et al., 2018; Ton et al., 2020) , the joint access -mode -and -station 

choice  (Bovy & Hoogendoorn -Lanser, 2005; Debrezion et al., 2009; Geržinič et al., 2023; van Mil et al., 

2021) , the access -main or main -egress mode choice  (Molin & Timmermans, 2010; Montes et al., 2023) 

or purely on the train/PT trip  (De Bruyn et al., 2023; Yap et al., 2024) . To the best of our knowledge, no 

study has jointly considered the choices for access mode, boarding station, alighting station, egress 

mode and all of that in comparison with a private main mode, i.e. taking a car or bicycle instead of the 

multimodal trai n trip .4

# 3 Methodology 

To identify how much value travellers put on different aspects of a multimodal trip and how they stack 

up against a unimodal trip, we make use of a discrete choice modelling technique. Discrete choice 

models (DCMs)  are a  well -known  and often applied method when quantifying the preferences and 

perceptions of people, with the goal of understanding what affects their choice behaviour.  We start by 

defining the trips which we are interested in assessing in Section  3.1 . Section  3.2  then elaborates  on the 

data requirements for  the DCM , followed by  an explanation on  how  the choice models are specified in 

Section  3.3 . A detailed description of the data used in the research is  provided  in Section  4.

# 3.1  Trips of interest 

When analysing train trips and non -train trips which have mode -shift potential, a common approach is 

to analyse longer trips, typically above 5, 10 or even 15km  (Jonkeren & Huang, 2024) . While being a 

somewhat crude approach, studies do confirm that the train, especially in combination with 

micromobility (cycling), tends to only be a feasible alternative at longer distances, likely when the 

benefits of higher speeds offered by train trav el can outweigh the substantial negatives experienced 

through access and egress legs  (Hoogendoorn -Lanser et al., 2006) . Jonkeren & Huang (2024)  also 

confirm this to be a valid approach, with the average car trip being around 17km long, whereas trips 

showing mode -shift potential averaging in the range of 30 -40km, with less than 1% of all bike -train 

trips being shorter than  8km. 

That being said, train trips below these distances do occur and, even if not chosen, still provide valuable 

information on the decision making and trade -off behaviour of travellers.  A different approach is to 

select trips which have a feasible train alternative , regardless of their length . After removing all trips 

below a distance of 10/15km,  Jonkeren & Huang (2024)  classified trips to be “potential train trips” if the 

door -to -door travel time was no longer than 1.5x that of the travel time by car (in some scenarios, ratios 

as low as 1 and 1.25 were also used). As their focus was bike -train trips, they also set a max imum 

access/egress distance for cycling. 

We choose to apply a similar approach, while avoiding making assumptions as to how much people are 

willing to accept. Hence, we do not include an upper boundary on the travel time ratios for train trips, 

nor do we assume a maximum access/egress distance to /from a station. Instead, we apply a fairly simple 

algorithm: we check what is the closest train station to the origin and to the destination location.  If this 

happens to be the same station, we conclude this not to be a feasible train trip.  If the origin  and 

destination are closer to different stations, we assume it to be a feasible train trip. 

# 3.2  Choice set development 

DCMs require choice observations, and the two typical data sources are either stated preference (SP) or 

revealed preference (RP)  (Hensher et al., 2008; Train, 2009) . SP data is obtained through surveys and is 

often used when analysing hypothetical future scenarios or options that either do not yet exist or are 

present on a very small scale . It also gives the researcher full control over the  experiment . RP on the 

other hand relies on observations of behaviour , making  the data more realistic , but requir ing  the 

researcher to make assumptions on the choice set of the decision -maker.  Post -hoc assembly of choice 

sets is therefore a key part of RP data .

In this study, we use RP data to analyse the preferences of travellers  for the entire door -to -door trip . In 

multimodal trips travellers have a series of choices  to make , namely access mode,  boarding  station ,

alighting  station and egress mode  (see  Figure  1). Constructing alternatives that contain all  these choices 

in an SP survey is  very difficult survey, as  it  would  likely  overwhelm the respondents  with the number of 

questions in the survey . As outlined in Section  2, p revious studies usually  analysed one or two parts of 5

the multimodal trip chain , in large  part  due to the complexity of the  SP  survey.  Through the RP approach, 

all these choices are included in the data. 

To construct the choice sets however, we need to make assumptions on the alternatives that may have 

been available and that the travellers had considered.  In our study, we consider an alternative to be a 

complete door -to -door trip; this means that if only one element along the trip differs (different access 

mode, different home -end station used etc.) it constitutes a different alternative.  Many different 

approaches exist on how to build a choice set, with an overview provided by  Arriagada et al. (2025) .

They show that  using past choices outperforms heuristic  methods. However, due to the nature of our 

dataset, applying any form of past choice analysis to reconstruct the choice set is infeasible.  This is 

because respondents only report three travel days in their diary, limiting the information we have at our 

disposal on their travel.  Given  this , we opt for the  heuristic  labelling approach  where we select a handful 

of best objective alternatives, i.e. with the shortest travel time, the closest station etc.  For train stations, 

we use the distance -based method  (Young & Blainey, 2018) , taking the nearest n stations to the origin 

and destination into the choice set.  To balance choice set  size and  still accounting for realistic options 

among stations, we  choose n=3.  From our data, we see that 94% of all train trips used one of the three 

closest origin stations and 96% one of three closest destination stations . Increasing n to 4 or 5 would 

allow us to capture an additional percentage or two of train trips in our data,  while drastically increasing 

the choice set size.  An alternative would h ave been the catchment area method (all stations within a 

given radius), although this method is discouraged by  Young & Blainey (2018) . We choose not to use 

this approach as it can result in  substantial differences in choice set sizes , further complicating what is 

already a complex model structure. It could result in some trips (in more rural areas) not having a single 

train station within the catchment area while other trips (in larger cities) having over 10 available 

stations.  We  continue to build up the choice set by including  the best option  (the ideal as provided by 

the routing API)  of each  access  and egress mode for each of the selected stations , guaranteeing  that 

each access mode is represented . This means  we circumvent the issue of underrepresenting walking 

and cycling as access modes  (Hoogendoorn -Lanser & Van Nes, 2004) . We specify walking, cycling, 

bus/tram/metro (BTM) and car as access options, with the first three also included as egress options. 

Although car can also be an egress mode (taxi, car sharing, car passenger), our data included too few 

records of this to allow us to model it as a separate mode.  For non -train trips, we  also  apply the labelling 

approach, finding the best option for each mode (walk, bicycle, car, BTM) . We include a single unimodal 

alternative per mode as the dataset does not contain information  on the route taken by the respondents. 

We are thus unable to account for route choice of the unimodal alternatives.  Given all the possible 

combinations of access modes (4), boarding stations (3), alighting stations (3) and egress modes (3), 

along with the non -train alternatives (4), we  end up with a  choice set size  of  112.  The full overview of 

choices can be found in  Figure  1.6 

> Figure 1. Overview of all the different options that travellers have when making unimodal and multimodal train trips

# 3.3  Modelling methodology 

Choice data is then analysed by means of a DCM,  where we assume that travellers make choices based 

on the random utility maximisation (RUM) decision rule  (McFadden, 1974) . Although other decision 

rules exist and there is no conclusive evidence that RUM -based models are superior  (Chorus et al., 2014; 

Van Cranenburgh & Chorus, 2018) , they are most often applied . Moreover,  testing for different decision 

rules is beyond the scope of this study. 

We estimat e a series of  multinomial logit (MNL) model s. Although not optimal, they provide us with a 

good starting point in the model estimation process. Given that many choices in our data are correlated, 

i.e. choosing a bicycle+train combination likely shares characteristics with the walk+train combination ,

we also need to  use  a model that can account for such underlying structures . We choose to apply the 

nested logit  (NL)  model. While a mixed  logit model can also account for nesting structures, and can also 

capture panel effects and respondent heterogeneity, the downside is that it is an open form model, 

requiring simulation and random draws, meaning that there is not a unique solution to the e stimation. 

Given the scale of the modelling task, estimating an open form model which requires simulations was 

excluded due to its substantial computational cost, which exceeded the practical time and resource 

constraints of the prese nt study. 

NL  on t he other hand is  closed form , makin g computationally much simpler  (Hensher & Rose, 2007) .

To apply the NL model, a nesting structure to model  needs to be defined . The simplest option is to 

create a single nest with all alternatives with the train in that nest . This structure focuses on the 

distinction based on the main mode.  Alternatively, nests  can be made  for each of the four choice 

components of the train trip, i.e. access mode,  boarding station, alighting  station  or  egress mode .

Thirdly, based on the nesting structure proposed by  van der Tuin et al. (2023) , we also specify nests 

based on two of the four options; one nest is “walking to station A”, then “cycling to station A” etc.  This 

also results in four possible nesting structures, namely :

1.  Access mode  – boarding station  (similarities based on the access leg) 

2.  Access mode  – egress mode  (similarities based on modal preferences) 7

3.  Boarding station  – alighting station  (similarities based on train preferences) 

4.  Alighting station  – egress mode  (similarities based on the egress leg) .

Other combinations  are possible , for example “access mode  – alighting station” , but  the  connections 

between them are not logical .

# 4 Data set description 

The dataset used in this study  features  travel diaries from the Dutch Mobility Panel (MPN) 

(Hoogendoorn -Lanser et al., 2015) . Panellists are asked to fill in a 3 -day travel diary on a yearly basis, 

along with a series of socio -demographic questions to complement the travel information.  We use data 

from the 2022 wave. 

This  following  section  provides additional information on  how th is  data was filtered  (Section  4.1 ), how 

the choice sets were constructed  (Section  4.2 ) and  finish es  with descriptive statistics  on the  panellists’ 

travel  behaviour  (Section  4.3 ). 

# 4.1  Data processing 

The first step of data preparation includes removing all erroneous and irrelevant data , as well as 

formatting  the data for the following steps . The full dataset contains 38,808  records , which are filtered 

as follows: 

1.  Erroneous data : missing or incorrectly specified  data  (postcode, departure and arrival times, 

train station…)  is removed .

2.  Tours : trips where the origin and destination are the same, with no intermediate stop .

3.  Trips not originating at home : trips which do not start at home have strong modal 

dependencies from the  previous trip , i.e. if a person leaves home by car, they will likely 

undertake the following trips by car as  well and  will  bring it back home . We do not make a 

distinction based on trip -chain complexity (how many trips  are in a home -to -home tour), as 

Schneider et al. (2021)  show there is no relation between trip -chain complexity and mode 

choice. 

4.  Trips without a feasible train alternative : as outlined in Section  3.1 , we do not apply a minimal 

cut -off distance, nor do we assume a maximal ratio of travel time or access/egress distance 

(Jonkeren & Huang, 2024) . Instead, we  check for the nearest train station to the origin and 

destination. If station closest to both the origin and destination is the same, the trip is removed. 

If they are close to different stations, the trip is kept .

This filtering approach reduces the dataset to 5,276 feasible trips.  Lastly, the trips data is  unif ied  and 

simplif ied :

1.  Aggregate  mode coding : the MPN records 29 possible modes. We  merge this  it into five mode 

groups : (1) walking, (2) cycling  (all different types of bicycles, including folding, racing, 

electric…) , (3) bus, tram or metro  (BTM) , (4) train and (5) car ( different sizes, propulsion types 

and including  both as a driver or passenger).  A detailed overview of mode grouping and their 

frequency is provided in  Table  4 in Appendix  A.

2.  Remove w alking trip legs  during transfers : due to the inconsistency of recording  walking 

during transfers, we decide to remove all walking trip legs that occur as part of a transfer. 

Although walking during transfers is common and transfers can vary substantially with respect 

to walking distance  and thus can have substantial impact on the choice to travel using PT , we 

remove walking legs between other modes, as  respondents did not consistently report this. We 8

do keep walking if recorded as  the first access leg, the last egress leg or the main and only 

mode  used for the trip .

3.  Merge  successive trip legs with the same mode : due to inconsistency of how transfers 

between the same mode are reported, we merge two successive trips with the same mode into 

one leg. So me respondents recorded the same mode twice in a row (i.e. bus and bus)  to indicate 

having made a transfer , whereas others did not . To standardise the data, we consider a new trip 

leg only if a different mode is used. Information on transfers is still included in the choice model 

based on data obtained during the choice set  construction step  (see  Section  4.2 ).

# 4.2  Choice set construction 

Next, we assemble the choice sets. As outlined in Section  3, RP data typically does not contain choice 

set information. The researcher instead needs to make assumptions on what the  consideration set  was. 

We use the labelling approach, which has the downside of being overcomplete with respect to the 

included alternatives, but guarantees that the choices are all represented  (Arriagada et al., 2025) . To 

obtain information on  alternatives, we make use of  the  Google  Directions  API , Google Distance Matrix 

API  and the Dutch Railways ’ own Reisinformatie (travel information)  API. 

As shown in  Figure  1, we need  information  on  both unimodal and multimodal travel alternatives. For 

unimodal trips for  walking, cycling,  and  car, we make use of the Google  Distance Matrix  API , while for 

public transport, we use the Google Directions API . We use the origin and destination postcodes, which 

in the Netherlands  represent a street . For  walking  and  cycling , we extract the travel time and travel 

distance. For the  car , we use the departure time and day of the week information from the dataset to 

obtain similar traffic conditions. We apply the departure time to be on the same weekday and time of 

da y as recorded. To  assess how much delay travellers may have experienced due to congestion, we also 

collect travel time data in free flow by using a  departure time at 03.00.  To  capture other characteristics 

of the car, especially related to parking , we use a proxy for parking difficulty: urbanisation level. The 

assumption is that (in the Netherlands) more urbanised areas are more difficult to park in  and  cost more. 

For this, we use the data from the Central Bureau for Statistics (CBS)  (CBS, 2024) .

For  bus/tram/metro  (BTM ), we extract the in -vehicle time, walking time before and after the  BTM  trip 

(to the first stop and from the last stop) the number of transfers and modes used. We specify the 

preference for bus, tram and metro (not train), to specifically force the use of non -train alternatives. If 

no feasible alternative exists, the API will  still suggest the train. In those instances, we consider the  BTM 

alternative to be unavailable. 

For the  train  trips,  we (1)  start by looking up the three closest stations to both the origin and destination 

(based on Euclidian distance) . As outlined in Section  3, we limit ourselves to the nearest three  to avoid 

exploding the size of the choice set . From the trips when a train was chosen, around 6% of trips used a 

boarding station and 4% an alighting station that was not among the three closest. In these instances, 

we code the used station as the 3 rd , to retain this data. These trips  always took place  in larger urban 

areas, where passengers tend to have many easily accessible  alternatives . Next, we  (2)  use the 

Reisinformatie  API to extract the travel time, ticket price and the number of transfers for all nine travel 

combinations between the boarding  and alighting  stations. We use the API of the Dutch railways as the 

data is more up to date, includes price information, and the required transfer time is  more realistic . In 

some cases, the same station may appear in both the access and egress set of stations. In that case, we 

consider that station pair to be unavailable. 

For access and egress trips, we apply the Google  Distance Matrix  API  and Google Directions API  in the 

same way as for the unimodal trips for walking, bicycle, car and  BTM , with a few minor differences: 9

1.  For the car, we only consider the normal travel time at the stated departure time 

2.  For  BTM , we do not force the use of bus, tram or metro, but let the API provide the most efficient 

solution. In cases where the train is offered, we consider that option irrelevant, as it indicates 

that the station is best accessible through other stations (usual ly one closer by), meaning we 

consider  the  BTM access/egress  option to  be unavailable .

3.  For  BTM , we only consider walking time at the start of the access trip or the end of the egress 

trip . Walking time during transfers is not considered, given the low reliability and variability of 

this data within the API. 

Lastly, for price, only the Reisinformatie API contains price information, meaning we do not have direct 

data on the price of BT M or car, for either the access, main or egress legs.  We thus impute these prices. 

For BTM, operators in the Netherlands use a based price + kilometre fare  (GVB, 2025) , which we combine 

with the trip distance obtained from the API.  For the car, we use the average fuel price and average car 

efficiency, resulting in an approximate 0.1€/km fare, which we multiply with trip distance. Apart from a 

handful of tunnels, road pricing is not used in the Netherlands, so we do not need to consi der the route. 

Lastly, bicycle parking facilities  tend to be free, with a few that do charge only doing so after the  first 24 

hours  (NS, 2025a) ; we thus do not consider any cost associated with parking  one’s  own bicycle.  For the 

bicycle on the egress leg, we use the €4.65 price of the Dutch railways bike sharing, which is present at 

most railway stations  (NS, 2025b) .

# 4.3  Descriptive statistics 

To get a better idea of the data, we present various descriptive statistics about the types of trips recorded 

in the dataset. Starting with  socio -demographics ( Table  1), we  see that  in most categories, our sample 

is well representative of the Dutch >18 population. We see a slight underrepresentation of individuals 

above the age of 80. With employment status, given the unavailability of all data, we cannot judge on 

the representativene ss among students and retirees, however we do observe a slight 

underrepresentation of the working population.  With education level, we see a slight 

underrepresentation of middle educated individuals (those with secondary and vocational education) 

and an overrepresentation of higher educated individuals (having a university degree). However, both 

with employment st atus and highest obtained education level, we cannot draw full conclusions on 

representativeness due to a sizeable share of respondents preferring  not to respond to these questions. 

The data for the Dutch population are obtained from the 2022 data provided by the Dutch bureau for 

statistics (CBS)  (CBS, 2022) . 

> Table 1. Socio -demographic characteristics of the sample

Socio -demographic  Category  Count  Share  Population (CBS, 2022) 

Gender  Female  1,331  52%  50.3% 

Male  1,251  48%  49.7% 

Age  18 -29  446  17%  18.9% 

30 -39  415  16%  16.2% 

40 -49  416  16%  14.6% 

50 -59  455  18%  16.3% 

60 -69  444  17%  15.6% 

70 -79  324  13%  12.1% 

>80  82  3%  6.4% 

Employment status  Working  1,413  55%  64.3% * 

Retired  515  20%  35.7 % * 10 

Student  239  9% 

Other  288  11% 

Prefer not to say  127  5% 

Education level  **  Low  661  26%  26.3% 

Middle  857  33%  41.4% 

High  936  36%  32.3% 

Prefer not to say  128  5%   

> *For employment status on the national level, only the working and non -working is displayed. Non -working thus
> includes all individuals who are retired, studying and others.
> ** Low: no education, elementary education or incomplete secondary education
> Middle: complete secondary education and vocational education
> High: bachelor’s or master’s degree from a research university or university of applied sciences

Next, we assess the exhibited travel behaviour. We start by analysing  the modal split and distance 

classes,  Figure  2 shows the modal split and total number of trips per trip distance , based on the main 

mode  (Euclidian distance ). The number of short trips  is rather small , due to the filtering applied, as 

described in Section  4.1 . The modal splits per distance class are within expectation for the Netherlands, 

with short trips being dominated by active modes, the car becoming dominant at trips over 3km and 

the train appearing as a major contender for trips over 10km. 

Figure  2. Distance distribution of recorded trips 

Looking at trip lengths per mode in  Figure  3, this trend reappears, with train trips being on average the 

longest (trips where train is the main mode) and active mode trips being on average the shortest.  When 

the train trip is analysed per trip leg,  walking and cycling have almost the same average distance on the 

access and egress side, indicating that both have an optimal/maximal length people are willing to travel. 

The averages of all access and egress trips reveal an important and know n fact, that access trips tend to 

be longer . The difference for the car is due to different  modes within the grouping  “car” , as shown in 

Table  4 in Appendix  A; private car (as driver) is the dominant form on the access leg, whereas shared car 

passenger on the egress leg .

28% 6% 

52% 58% 49% 

40% 24% 

10% 5% 

5% 

5% 

5% 8% 15% 16% 

20% 

35% 48% 

57% 

70% 

80% 83% 83% 

84% 

0

100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

600 

700 

800 

900 

1000 

1100 

1200 

(0,1] (1,2] (2,3] (3,5] (5,10] (10,15] (15,25] (25,50] (50,inf) 

> Number of trips

Distance classes [km] 

Car 

Train 

BTM 

Bike 

Walk 11  

> Figure 3. Average trip lengths of different modes and trip legs 1

Looking at the combined choices of access mode, boarding station, alighting station and egress mode 

(Figure  4), we see that  around half of all trips begin with a bicycle, with around a third being walking 

trips. On the egress leg however, walking dominates as an egress mode with two out of every three 

train trips ending with walking, followed by almost 20% of egress trips under taken with BTM.  The car 

comes in last both as an access or egress mode.  The patterns of which modes are used to access which 

station are largely similar  on both the access and egress side,  with  a large majority  (>75%)  of travellers 

use the closest stations for their train trips.  Walking is  almost exclusively used to access/egress  the 

closest station, with cycling and car also  primarily  being  used  to  travel to/from  the closest  station . BTM 

on the other hand  tends to be  use d more often to access /egress  more d istant stations.  This may imply 

that  when  travelling with BTM, the station is often not the closest, but the one best connected  in the 

railway  network , offering both better BTM connections and  higher  quality  train services.       

> Figure 4. Access and egress mode; and boarding and alighting station distribution in the data
> 1The train trip distance between the two charts in Figure 3differs. The first shows the average door -to -door trip
> distance where the train is the main mode. The second shows the average station -to -station distance of the train
> trip.

12 

# 5 Modelling r esults 

This section  presents the  final  model specifications and  parameter estimates , as  shown in  Table  2. The 

model was estimated using Pandas Biogeme  (Bierlaire, 2023) . For each group of parameters, the various 

tested specifications are discussed.  The  final  model achieved a model fit of 0.8459 adjusted rho -square 

and a BIC value of 7,095. 

Test ing  a wide array of nesting structures, the simplest single -nest structure  – all alternatives making 

use of the train  – outperformed all others , both in terms of model fit and BIC value . The detailed 

modelling outcomes are presented in  Table  5 in  Appendix  B. The nesting parameter was estimated to 

be  2.45, which translates into a correlation of 0.83 between the alternatives  with in the same nest.  This 

signifies that modes within the nest primarily compete with each other and less with alternatives outside 

the nest. A new train -based alternative is therefore more likely to attract existing train travellers (but 

using different access/egress modes or  stations) than non -train travellers , meaning the modal shift to 

the train is limited. 

With respect to taste parameters, we note that no cost parameter is included in the final model. Despite 

including cost in a variety of approaches, including (1) as a separate parameter, (2) with value -of -time 

and (3) a time/cost ratio, all the resulting m odels were either not significantly better, the cost parameter 

was illogical (positive) or insignificant or all of the above. This issue arises because price was obtained 

through distance, meaning price and time are highly correlated, with a correlation co efficient of 0.97 ,

meaning that price is likely already captured in the travel time parameter . We therefore decide to 

proceed with modelling without the cost  parameter.    

> Table 2. Nested model parameter estimates, and model fit

Parameters  24

Null Loglikelihood  -22,514 

Final Loglikelihood  -3, 444 

Adjusted Rho -square  0.8 459 

BIC  7, 095 

Estimate  t-val. 

Nesting parameter   2.450  9.03  ** 

Trip -related parameters  Mode 

Travel time 

[min] 

Walk, Bicycle, Car  -0.082  -13.50 ** 

BTM, Train  -0.034  -7.91 ** 

Car traffic  -0.015  -0.94 

Transfer [constant]  BTM, Train  -0.864  -7.69 ** 

Highly urbanised origin [constant]  Car  -0.299  -3.20 ** 

Highly urbanised destination [constant]  Car  -0.945  -10.90 ** 

Mode -specific constants  Mode 

Main mode 

[constant] 

Baseline trip purpose: Leisure 

Baseline car availability: None 

Walk  0 (ref) 

Bicycle  -0.140  -0.69 

Car  -0.106  -0.43 

BTM  -1.850  -7.29 ** 

Train  -1.760  -6.92 ** 

Main mode  Walk  0 (ref) 13 

[interaction] 

Work trip 

Bicycle  2.130  4.09 ** 

Car  1.060  2.02 * 

BTM  2.150  3.92 ** 

Train  2.450  4.49 ** 

Main mode 

[interaction] 

Car available 

Walk  0 (ref) 

Bicycle  -0.154  -0.70 

Car  0.569  2.53 * 

BTM  -0.961  -3.51 ** 

Train  -0.522  -1.94 * 

Access mode 

[constant] 

Walk  0 (ref) 

Bicycle  -1.020  -10.10 ** 

Car  -2.050  -10.40 ** 

BTM  -1.810  -9.69 ** 

Egress mode 

[constant] 

Walk  0 (ref) 

Bicycle  -1.860  -10.70 ** 

BTM  -1.750  -11.10 ** 

> ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.1

# 5.1  Trip -related  parameters 

Starting with travel time, we test  mode -specific and leg -specific travel time parameters to analyse  if the 

perception differs per mode (walk, bicycle, car, BTM and train) and trip leg (access, main, egress). The 

results  indicate  that the perception  of  travel  time does not  vary between different trip legs , i.e.  the same 

mode was always perceived the same no matter  during  which leg of the trip.  Mode -specific perception 

shows that  time spent walking, cycling or driving was not significantly different, whereas time spent in 

any PT mode (bus, tra m, metro or train) was also not significantly different from each other, while being 

less negative than time walking, cycling and driving. Specifically, time in PT is only 40% as negative as 

time walking, cycling or driving. The most likely reason for this  is that one has the freedom to do other 

things while in PT, making time less important. In other modes, one actively needs to drive/steer, pay 

attention to one’s surroundings and cannot (should not) do anything else. Alternatively, t his could also 

be rela ted to the missing cost data due to issues with high collinearity. 

For car trips, we also test if the additional travel time incurred due to traffic has a more negative 

perception and our results show it is not, with the parameter being insignificant. This suggests that while 

people do prefer to avoid traffic, purely for  the sake of saving travel time and not necessarily that it is 

time that is perceived more negatively than regular driving time. 

Lastly, we analyse the perception of transfers in PT legs. Here too, we test if transfers on a BTM trip or 

on a train trip differ, and the results suggest it does not. According to our results, a transfer is thus 

perceived equally in any PT mode. The penal ty for a transfer is quite substantial, suggesting that 

travellers are willing to walk/cycle/drive to a station up to 10min farther, if it allows them to avoid one 

transfer. From the perspective of PT in -vehicle time, this means travellers are willing to r ide a full 25min 

more if this enables them to avoid a transfer. 

# 5.2  Alternative specific constants 

Moving to m ode -specific constants , we separate them  into three separate groups for the different trip 

legs, namely access, main and egress , with walking used as the baseline in all three groups.  Interaction 

effects only had a significant effect on mode preference in the main leg, with access - and egress -leg 

interactions producing limited and often insignificant impacts.  The main leg preference is interacted 14 

with trip purpose (work or leisure) and if the respondent  owned a car  or not 2. Figure  4 shows the scale 

of the modal preferences under different circumstances.  We see that in general, travellers prefer private 

modes like the bicycle and car for work -related trips.  As can also be expected, if the individual does not 

have a car, the preference for car is lower compared to other modes , although the difference is not 

substantial . It is also interesting to note that public transport modes are less preferred for leisure trips 

and more for work -related trips.  This could be because the more regular travel patterns related to 

commuting, travel reimbursement for public tra nsport and the fact that many offices are located in well 

accessible locations. 

To mimic the difficulty of driving in more dense urban areas and finding parking there, we interact the 

five urbanisation levels with the car. Only the highest urbanisation level category achieved a significant 

interaction and as expected, it discourages d riving in relation to other modes.  

> Figure 5. Mode preferences under different context conditions and for different trips

For  both  access and egress trips to/from the train station, walking is the most preferred mode  (Figure 

5). On the access side, it is followed by cycling. In the Netherlands, train stations have extensive parking 

facilities, with many towns having big, covered and supervising bicycle garages, making parking  one’s 

bicycle at the station very convenient.  BTM and car come in third and fourth respectively. BTM 

connections to train stations tend to be good in the Netherlands, although the additional cost and 

coordinating train and BTM schedules likely makes it less appealing . On the other hand, the car offers 

more fre edom, but parking at many train stations can be challenging.  More rural stations often have 

park -and -ride facilities, but in towns this is typically not the case, making parking very difficult. 

On the egress side, BTM and the bicycle are roughly equally (dis)liked, with a slight preference for the 

former.  The comparatively lower preference for the bicycle on the egress trip compared to the access 

trip is likely  since  most travellers do not have a second bicycle available at the destination side, meaning 

they rely on shared bicycles if they wish to travel the last mile by bicycle. 

# 6 Implications 

As the impact and interactions of the taste parameters are  not always immediately clear, this section 

provides additional insight into the trade -offs between parameters and what affects mode choice under 

different circumstances. The section starts by diving into the implications of the main -leg parameters,  

> 2

Even if travellers do not  own  a car,  we still include the car alternative, given that the “car” alternative 

includes also modes such as car passenger, shared car or taxi. The car can also be borrowed by someone 

in the household, as the car ownership data is recorded on an individual basis, no t household basis.  

> -3
> -2
> -1
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> Work trip
> Car available
> Work trip
> No car
> Leisure trip
> Car available
> Leisure trip
> No car
> Access trip Egress trip
> (Dis)utility

Walk 

Bicycle 

Car 

BTM 

Train 15 

followed by access -leg parameters in Section  6.2  and egress -leg parameters in Section  6.3 . Lastly, based 

on the first three sections, the policy recommendations are discussed in Section  6.4 .

# 6.1  Implications of the main leg 

The main leg of the trip is characterised by mode -specific constants, two in -vehicle time  (IVT) 

parameters, transfer and interaction effects.  Starting with the comparison trade -offs between the IVT 

parameters and other constants, we show how much walk/bicycle/car (private mode) IVT  and PT IVT 

travellers are willing to trade in  Table  3.

We see  that for example that if the train leg has a transfer,  the travel time of private modes can be up 

to 10min longer to still be equally attractive. It also means that on the access or egress leg, people are 

willing to travel to a station up to 10min farther  to  avoid a transfer.  For the car, highly urbanised regions 

are less attractive; specifically, a trip originating in a dense urban area equals a travel time penalty of 

~3.6min, meaning for example that travellers accept a 3.6min longer cycling or wal king time as opposed 

to less dense areas.  For the destination, the penalty is higher at over 11min. 

The same trade -offs can be seen for PT IVT, being are roughly 2.5x higher as PT IVT is seen as less 

negative, meaning that travellers are willing to accept more travel time in PT for making these same 

trade -offs.  To avoid a transfer, people seem to be willing to travel some 25min longer.  And for travelling 

to a dense urban area, the travel time can be 28min longer than a trip to a less dense area  for it to 

remain equally appealing.    

> Table 3. Trade -offs between different taste parameters and how they relate to perceived travel time

Walk, Bicycle, Car IVT [min]  PT IVT [min] 

Walk, Bicycle, Car IVT  [min]  - 2.4 

PT IVT  [min]  0.4  -

Transfer  10.5  25.6 

Highly urbanised origin  3.6  8.9 

Highly urbanised destination  11.5  28.0 

# 6.2  Implications of the access leg 

As station accessibility is essential for its attractiveness , we start by analysing the impact of the 

availability of different modes to reach a train station.  Faster modes allow for a larger catchment area, 

providing an acceptable level of accessibility for a larger number of people . Figure  6 (left)  shows how 

the share of train trips would change based on how far the station is from someone’s origin and which 

modes are available to them.  The details of these calculations are explained in  Appendix  C. Figure  6

(right)  then shows how much the share of train increases if the bicycle, BTM or car is added to an 

otherwise walk -only option.  Both figures show that cycling seems to have by far the  largest impact on 

improving station accessibility, having the potential to increase train market share by over 10  percentage 

points (p.p.)  for  certain  access distances . BTM is primarily interesting for slightly longer access distances 

(>5km) compared to the bicycle, as it involves walking and waiting time, which can only be “worth it” 

beyond a certain travel time.  Interestingly,  car seems to impact the train market share the least , with 

limited  benefit s for all distances below 10km. 16     

> Figure 6. Market share (left) and the change of market share (right) of train as the main mode, if bicycle, car or BTM
> are added as access modes, when walking is already possible . The change on the right is compared to the
> benchmark where walking is the only alternative.

As BTM and car are likely to have some additional benefits for longer trips compared to cycling , we also 

analyse how their inclusion changes the attractiveness of a train station to which travellers can both 

walk and cycle.  Figure  7 (left)  shows that the increase in market share is not easily noticeable.  Figure  7

(right)  highlights that, as expected, having both BTM and car alongside walking and cycling provides 

the biggest increase in train market share.  However, on their own, BTM has a much higher added value, 

increasing train market share by an additional 2 p.p. , whereas the car only reaches a ~0.75 p.p. increase 

at most . BTM  also increases the market share more at longer distances, which better complements the 

shorter distances reachable by walking and cycling.    

> Figure 7. Market share (left) and the change of market share (right) of train as the main mode, if car, BTM or both
> are added as access modes , when walking and cycling are already possible

Lastly, we look at the modal split on  the  access leg on its own and focus on the impact of  the quality of 

the BTM service , specifically walking time and transfers. The former can be seen as a proxy for the 

network density, as individuals need to walk further if the network is less dense.  Below, we analyse the 

impact of a transfer, which has the same impact as an additional 10min walking time, which is also not 

unheard of.  As shown in  Figure  8, a transfer  in the BTM leg  can have a substantial impact on the modal 

split. In the case of a direct BTM trip ( Figure  8 left), it becomes the dominant mode for all distances 

beyond 5km , taking over from the bicycle , while the car never surpasses a market share of 15%.  If the 

BTM trip does require a transfer, the bicycle is the preferred mode of choice for access distances up to 

8km , while the car’s market share reaches almost 30% and is preferred to BTM up to 7km.           

> 0%
> 10%
> 20%
> 30%
> 40%
> 50%
> 60%
> 012345678910
> Market share

Access distance [km]           

> walk, bicycle
> walk, BTM
> walk, car
> walk
> 0.0%
> 2.5%
> 5.0%
> 7.5%
> 10.0%
> 12.5%
> 012345678910
> Change in market share (p.p.)

Access distance [km] 

bicycle 

BTM 

car           

> 0%
> 10%
> 20%
> 30%
> 40%
> 50%
> 60%
> 012345678910
> Market share

Access distance [km]           

> walk, bicycle, BTM, car
> walk, bicycle, BTM
> walk, bicycle, car
> walk, bicycle
> 0.0%
> 0.5%
> 1.0%
> 1.5%
> 2.0%
> 2.5%
> 012345678910
> Change in market share (p.p.)

Access distance [km] 

BTM, car 

BTM 

car 17    

> Figure 8. Mode preferences on the access leg, if the BTM option has 0 transfers (left) or 1 transfer (right) for reaching
> the train station

# 6.3  Implications of the egress leg 

A similar pattern to what we see on the access leg can be observed on the egress leg . As seen in  Figure 

9, adding faster egress modes will often substantially increase the attractiveness of the train for 

distances of over 2km.  Conversely to the access side however, BTM is the mode of choice on the egress 

leg.  It’s lower constant, combined with a lower IVT perception makes it much more attractive.  On its 

own, it can attract double as many passengers as the bicycle (5 p.p. increase vs. 2.5 p.p. increase).  The 

peak increase also occurs about 1km farther  from the station.  Including both modes has the biggest 

benef it, but interestingly, the addition of the  (shared)  bicycle, if  (higher quality)  BTM is already present, 

does not add that much added value for the train as the main mode.   

> Figure 9. Market share (left) and the change of market share (right) of train as the main mode, if bicycle, BTM or
> both are added as egress modes, when walking is already possible

If travellers are required to transfer  during their BTM egress trip however, the modal split changes 

drastically  (Figure  10 ). With a direct BTM trip, it becomes the mode of choice already at distances beyond 

1. 7km, with the  (shared)  bicycle never becoming the most popular mode.  With one transfer, the  (shared) 

bicycle becomes substantially more appealing, surpassing walking at 1.8km of egress and being the 

preferred egress mode up ~4km, when the additional time and effort of cycling no longer  outweighs 

the disutility of the transfer in the BTM trip.           

> 0%
> 20%
> 40%
> 60%
> 80%
> 100%
> 012345678910
> Market share

Access distance [km]           

> 012345678910

Access distance [km]           

> walk
> bicycle
> car
> 0%
> 10%
> 20%
> 30%
> 40%
> 50%
> 60%
> 012345678910
> Market share

Egress distance [km]           

> walk, bicycle, BTM
> walk, BTM
> walk, bicycle
> walk
> 0%
> 1%
> 2%
> 3%
> 4%
> 5%
> 6%
> 7%
> 8%
> 012345678910
> Change in market share (p.p.)

Egress distance [km] 

bicycle, BTM 

BTM 

bicycle 18  

> Figure 10 . Mode preferences on the egress leg, if the BTM option has 0 transfers (left) or 1 transfer (right) for
> reaching the destination from the train station

# 6.4  Policy implications  and recommendations 

Based on the findings presented above,  we outline four key  recommendations  for policy and practice .

Firstly,  improve egress options of existing stations and add new stations in urban areas, especially in 

areas with high job density. We see from our results that  work -related trips and trips destined for urban 

areas  show the greatest mode -shift potential and  should  therefore  be the primary target for a shift to 

trains. Travellers already find trains to be more attractive in those contexts so increasing  the mo dal split 

for those trips should be easier. 

Secondly,  increase  the number of stations  along corridors where most travellers would make use of a 

direct (non -transfer) service.  Given that travel time in PT is less negative than access/egress time , adding 

new stations would  reduce the average  access  distance to the nearest train station.  Adding stations 

however needs to be balanced with ensuring direct train services for as many travellers as possible, as 

the benefits of shorter access distances can quickly be outweighed by imposing an additional transf er, 

diminishing all the benefits of the new station. 

Thirdly, Intercity trains should stop more frequently. In the Netherlands, Intercity trains are the limited 

stopping service that tend to traverse the country and only stop in larger settlements and in the highest 

density areas. The new stops should be mor e than 5km (distance up to which people are willing to cycle 

to avoid a transfer) from the nearest Intercity stop and should provide direct connections to new 

destinations. Given the relatively low impact of public transport travel time on the overall disu tility, an 

additional stop or two would make little impact in terms of travel time perception, while providing a 

substantial number of travellers with new direct travel alternatives. 

Fourthly , focus on cycling infrastructure at origin stations (home -end) through improved cycle lanes and 

parking facilities.  For distances of 1 -5km, cycling is by far the most preferred mode and given its limited 

environmental impact and spatial footprint  (Mbugua et al., 2025) , it should be encouraged as much as 

possible. If the population density is also high beyond 5km with no or limited train stations, BTM services 

should also complement the cycling infrastructure for those living further away. In lower density areas, 

where  high quality BTM cannot be justified, park -and -ride facilities can help in attracting those living 

further from the station. 

Fifthly , focus on walkability and BTM services at destination stations (activity -end), with shared bicycles 

coming into play in lower density areas where high -quality BTM cannot be justified.  For all destinations 

up to 1.5 -2km, walking tends to be the most preferred, so walkable areas in the vicinity of stations 

should be prioritised.  If there is substantial density also beyond this distance, high quality BTM (direct,           

> 0%
> 10%
> 20%
> 30%
> 40%
> 50%
> 60%
> 70%
> 80%
> 90%
> 100%
> 012345678910
> Market share

Egress distance [km]           

> 012345678910

Egress distance [km] 

walk 

bicycle 

BTM 19 

dense, frequent) should be encouraged.  Shared bicycles  can provide a good alternative to  BTM and 

have a  substantially larger  added value in lower  density areas, where high -quality BTM services cannot 

be justified. 

# 7 Conclusions 

This paper analyses the preferences and choice behaviour of travellers in door -to -door trips, comparing 

private unimodal alternatives with a train -based multimodal option.  We include a series of choices made 

by travellers in multimodal trips  – the access mode, boarding station, alighting station and egress mode 

– and compare it to a unimodal trip by car, bicycle or walking.  Using revealed preference data from the 

Dutch Mobility Panel, we estimate a nested logit model to disentangle the impact of individual  trip 

characteristics on the journey as a whole. 

Our findings show that , in  as the main mode , private modes like walking, cycling and the car , are 

preferred to both train and bus/tram/metro (BTM).  Owning  a car  further reduced the attractiveness of 

train and BTM, while walk ing  and cycl ing  are  un affected.  Work -related trips make all other modes more 

attractive compared to walking.  While private modes may be preferred on the whole, they do seem to 

be associated with a higher travel -time penalty, with public transport  (PT)  (train and BTM) travel time 

being almost 60% lower, more than the 30 -50% decrease found by most studies in the field  (Bovy & 

Hoogendoorn -Lanser, 2005; Geržinič et al., 2023; van Mil et al., 2021) . The high dispreference for PT and 

low PT IVT perception suggests  that there is a strong initial barrier to using PT, but  once chosen,  the 

time spent travelling is not  perceived so  negatively.  The high initial penalty could be due to the multi -

leg nature of train (PT) trips or a general aversion towards it. Low IVT perception on the other hand may 

be linked to the opportunity of using travel time productively. 

On access and egress trip legs,  walking  tends to be  the most preferred. Cycling is primarily attractive on 

the access leg while BTM is the mode of choice for longer egress trips , aligning with most access/egress 

research  (Bovy & Hoogendoorn -Lanser, 2005; Geržinič et al., 2023; Halldórsdóttir et al., 2017; Keijer & 

Rietveld, 2000; La Paix Puello & Geurs, 2014) . These  preferences  do not seem to be affected by either 

car ownership or trip purpose . The valuation of travel time is also the same as for the main mode, with 

BTM being equal to train IVT, whereas walking, cycling and driving are perceived  equally and more 

negative  than PT . While the ratios do not align that clearly with the results of  Bovy & Hoogendoorn -

Lanser (2005) , the grouping of modes and how they relate to one another is identica l: car, bicycle and 

walk are equal and more negative, while train and BTM are lower and also (almost) identical. 

Lastly, transfers and urbanisation level play a big role in mode choice.  Transfers are  perceived  highly 

negative ly , with respondents indicating a willingness to walk, cycle or drive to a station 10min farther to 

avoid a transfer, or travel by BTM or train a full 25min longer.  Since transfers were not modelled in more 

detail, this transfer penalty  is the average of all transfers and  includes any prospective walking , climbing 

up/down  a set of  stairs , waiting and also the potential of missing the connection an d being late/having 

to wait for the next departure. 

Urbanisation level has been used as a proxy for driving and parking difficulty, indicating that drivers 

especially want to avoid driving into dense urban areas, accepting an additional 28min by train  to go 

there, or alternatively driving 11min farther by car to reach a  different  destination in a less urbanised 

area. 

While great care was taken in our study, concessions had to be made in certain cases  based on the 

available  data and  resources . Although multiple model specifications were tested, none of them  justified 

the inclusion of a cost parameter. Due to the nature of ex -post price determination in RP models, the 20 

travel costs are often correlated with travel time. While this is logical and common, it causes difficulties 

for discrete choice models trying to disentangle the impact of individual effects. While our model does 

not include a direct cost parameter, it is  effectively included in the time parameter. 

In the modelling approach, the panel structure of the data could not be considered due to the already 

complex model and computational limitations. A panel mixed logit or latent class choice model could 

better account for such data and provide additional in sights into the heterogeneity of travellers and 

potential  traveller  segments.  Due to the limited occurrence of certain modes ( especially non -driver car 

modes, like  car passenger or taxi), we needed to aggregate them into five categories to enable a 

meaningful model estimation.  Additional data on trips with these  more niche  modes or a more 

qualitative approach would  provide additional insights into what makes these modes appealing , what 

is preventing their wider adoption and  what could further encourage their use.  Due to already complex 

structure and limited data available, we also f orwent a more detailed modelling of transfers, i.e. walking 

time/distance, type of transfer (cross -platform, cross -station), waiting time, likelihood of making the 

connection etc.  To better understand the penalty associated with transfers, more detailed data is needed 

to tackle this  problem. 

Additionally, we  outline  a few more potential  research directions: f irstly, as our research could not 

account for the impact of cost on the trip due to the high collinearity, we are unable to directly extract 

the willingness to pay from our study.  Although ou r results of IVT and modal preference are solid and 

align with past literature, future research should work towards including  travel  cost in such studies as 

well, making the conclusions even more robust.  Secondly,  by including all possible modes -station 

combinations, we likely overestimated the scope of the consideration set of respondents.  Although 

Arriagada et al. (2025)  show that using a choice set of past observations is superior, that approach also 

makes strong assumptions, that anything not chosen is not even considered.  Future research could 

adopt  the  approach  of  Hoogendoorn -Lanser & Van Nes (2004) , directly  asking respondents  for  their 

consideration set.  Thirdly , RP datasets should be enriched with observations of shared micromobility as 

an egress mode. This shows to be a promising way to close the last mile  (Geržinič et al., 2025; Oeschger 

et al., 2023) , but studies have so far relied almost exclusively on stated preference data, which the 

hypothetical bias as its biggest downside. 

# References 

Arriagada, J., Guevara, A., & Munizaga, M. (2025).  Assessing Feasible Approaches for Building the 

Consideration Set in Public Transport Route Choice Modeling Using Smart Card Data .

https://doi.org/10.2139/SSRN.5346016 

Azimi, G., Rahimi, A., Lee, M., & Jin, X. (2021). Mode choice behavior for access and egress connection 

to transit services.  International Journal of Transportation Science and Technology , 10 (2), 136 –155. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJTST.2020.11.004 

Bierlaire, M. (2023).  A short introduction to Biogeme .

Bovy, P. H. L., & Hoogendoorn -Lanser, S. (2005). Modelling route choice behaviour in multi -modal 

transport networks.  Transportation , 32 (4), 341 –368. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11116 -004 -7963 -2

Brons, M., Givoni, M., & Rietveld, P. (2009). Access to railway stations and its potential in increasing rail 

use.  Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice , 43 (2), 136 –149. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2008.08.002 

CBS. (2022).  StatLine  - Datasets . https://opendata.cbs.nl/#/CBS/nl/navigatieScherm/thema 21 

CBS. (2024).  Kerncijfers per postcod . https://www.cbs.nl/nl -nl/dossier/nederland -

regionaal/geografische -data/gegevens -per -postcode 

Chorus, C. G., Van Cranenburgh, S., & Dekker, T. (2014). Random regret minimization for consumer 

choice modeling: Assessment of empirical evidence.  Journal of Business Research , 67 (11), 2428 –

2436. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2014.02.010 

De Bruyn, M., Vaatstra, I., & van Heijningen, P. (2023). De reiziger kiest: korter onderweg of minder 

overstappen? Hoe vervelend vindt de klant een overstap?  Bijdrage Aan Het Colloquium 

Vervoersplanologisch Speurwerk . https://www.cvs -

congres.nl/e2/site/cvs/custom/site/upload/file/paper_search/2023/de_reiziger_kiest_korter_onde 

rweg_of_minder_overstappen_.pdf 

Debrezion, G., Pels, E., & Rietveld, P. (2009). Modelling the joint access mode and railway station choice. 

Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review , 45 (1), 270 –283. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2008.07.001 

Geržinič, N., Cats, O., van Oort, N., Hoogendoorn -Lanser, S., & Hoogendoorn, S. (2023). What is the 

market potential for on -demand services as a train station access mode?  Transportmetrica A: 

Transport Science . https://doi.org/10.1080/23249935.2023.2179345 

Geržinič, N., van Hagen, M., Al -Tamimi, H., Duives, D., & van Oort, N. (2025).  How do activity -end trip 

characteristics affect the choice for shared micromobility? A latent class choice modelling approach 

for train station egress trips in the Netherlands . https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03297 

GVB. (2025).  tarieven . https://www.gvb.nl/tarieven 

Halldórsdóttir, K., Nielsen, O. A., & Prato, C. G. (2017). Home -end and activity -end preferences for access 

to and egress from train stations in the Copenhagen region.  International Journal of Sustainable 

Transportation , 11 (10), 776 –786. https://doi.org/10.1080/15568318.2017.1317888 

Hensher, D. A., & Rose, J. M. (2007). Development of commuter and non -commuter mode choice models 

for the assessment of new public transport infrastructure projects: A case study.  Transportation 

Research Part A: Policy and Practice , 41 (5), 428 –443. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRA.2006.09.006 

Hensher, D. A., Rose, J. M., & Greene, W. H. (2008). Combining RP and SP data: biases in using the nested 

logit ‘trick’  – contrasts with flexible mixed logit incorporating panel and scale effects.  Journal of 

Transport Geography , 16 (2), 126 –133. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JTRANGEO.2007.07.001 

Hoogendoorn -Lanser, S., Nes, R. Van, Hoogendoorn, S. P., & Bovy, P. (2006). Home –Activity Approach 

to Multimodal Travel Choice Modeling.  Transportation Research Record , 1985 (1), 180 –187. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0361198106198500120 

Hoogendoorn -Lanser, S., Schaap, N. T. W., & Oldekalter, M. J. (2015). The netherlands mobility panel: 

An innovative design approach for web -based longitudinal travel data collection.  Transportation 

Research Procedia , 11 , 311 –329. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trpro.2015.12.027 

Hoogendoorn -Lanser, S., & Van Nes, R. (2004). Multimodal Choice Set Composition: Analysis of 

Reported and Generated Choice Sets.  Transportation Research Record , 1898 (1898), 79 –86. 

https://doi.org/10.3141/1898 -10 

Jonkeren, O., & Huang, B. (2024).  Modal shift van auto naar de combinatie fiets -ov .

https://www.kimnet.nl/publicaties/notities/2024/04/25/modal -shift -van -auto -naar -de -

combinatie -fiets -ov 22 

Keijer, M. J. N., & Rietveld, P. (2000). How do people get to the railway station? The Dutch experience. 

Transportation Planning and Technology , 23 (3), 215 –235. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/03081060008717650 

Krygsman, S., Dijst, M., & Arentze, T. (2004). Multimodal public transport: an analysis of travel time 

elements and the interconnectivity ratio.  Transport Policy , 11 (3), 265 –275. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRANPOL.2003.12.001 

La Paix Puello, L., & Geurs, K. (2014). Adaptive stated choice experiment for access and egress mode 

choice to train stations.  World Symposium of Transport Land Use and Research (WSTLUR), 24 -27 

June, Delft, The Netherlands , (January). 

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273568361_ADAPTIVE_STATED_CHOICE_EXPERIMENT_ 

FOR_ACCESS_AND_EGRESS_MODE_CHOICE_TO_TRAIN_STATIONS 

Martens, K. (2004). The bicycle as a feedering mode: experiences from three European countries. 

Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment , 9(4), 281 –294. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRD.2004.02.005 

Martens, K. (2007). Promoting bike -and -ride: The Dutch experience.  Transportation Research Part A: 

Policy and Practice , 41 (4), 326 –338. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRA.2006.09.010 

Mbugua, L. W., Duives, D., Annema, J. A., & van Oort, N. (2025). Societal costs and benefits analysis of 

integrating bike -sharing systems with public transport: A case study of the public transport bike 

(‘OV -fiets’) in the Netherlands.  Case Studies on Transport Policy , 21 , 101513. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CSTP.2025.101513 

McFadden, D. (1974). The measurement of urban travel demand.  Journal of Public Economics , 3(4), 303 –

328. https://doi.org/10.1016/0047 -2727(74)90003 -6

Molin, E. J. E., & Timmermans, H. J. P. (2010). Context Dependent Stated Choice Experiments: The Case 

of Train Egress Mode Choice.  Journal of Choice Modelling , 3(3), 39 –56. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S1755 -5345(13)70013 -7

Montes, A., Geržinic, N., Veeneman, W., van Oort, N., & Hoogendoorn, S. (2023). Shared micromobility 

and public transport integration  - A mode choice study using stated preference data.  Research in 

Transportation Economics , 99 , 101302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.retrec.2023.101302 

NS. (2025a).  Fietsenstalling  - Fiets stallen op het station . https://www.ns.nl/fietsenstallingen 

NS. (2025b).  OV -fiets huren . https://www.ns.nl/deur -tot -deur/ov -fiets 

Oeschger, G., Caulfield, B., & Carroll, P. (2023). Investigating the role of micromobility for first - and last -

mile connections to public transport.  Journal of Cycling and Micromobility Research , 100001. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCMR.2023.100001 

Rietveld, P. (2000). The accessibility of railway stations: the role of the bicycle in The Netherlands. 

Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment , 5(1), 71 –75. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S1361 -9209(99)00019 -X

Schneider, F., Ton, D., Zomer, L. B., Daamen, W., Duives, D., Hoogendoorn -Lanser, S., & Hoogendoorn, 

S. (2021). Trip chain complexity: a comparison among latent classes of daily mobility patterns. 

Transportation , 48 (2), 953 –975. https://doi.org/10.1007/S11116 -020 -10084 -1/TABLES/3 23 

Shelat, S., Huisman, R., & van Oort, N. (2018). Analysing the trip and user characteristics of the combined 

bicycle and transit mode.  Research in Transportation Economics , 69 , 68 –76. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.retrec.2018.07.017 

Ton, D., Shelat, S., Nijënstein, S., Rijsman, L., van Oort, N., & Hoogendoorn, S. (2020). Understanding the 

Role of Cycling to Urban Transit Stations through a Simultaneous Access Mode and Station Choice 

Model.  Transportation Research Record , 2674 (8), 823 –835. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0361198120925076/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/10.1177_0361198120925076 

-FIG4.JPEG 

Train, K. (2009). Discrete choice methods with simulation. In  Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation 

(Vol. 9780521816). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511753930 

Van Cranenburgh, S., & Chorus, C. G. (2018). Does the decision rule matter for large -scale transport 

models?  Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice , 114 , 338 –353. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2018.01.035 

van der Tuin, M., Zhou, H., & Walraven, E. (2023). Simultaneous modelling of access, egress & transit 

line choice for public transport.  Transportation Research Procedia , 72 , 3793 –3800. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TRPRO.2023.11.509 

van Mil, J. F. P., Leferink, T. S., Annema, J. A., & van Oort, N. (2021). Insights into factors affecting the 

combined bicycle -transit mode.  Public Transport , 13 (3), 649 –673. https://doi.org/10.1007/S12469 -

020 -00240 -2/TABLES/6 

Wardman, M. (2004). Public transport values of time.  Transport Policy , 11 (4), 363 –377. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2004.05.001 

Yap, M., Wong, H., & Cats, O. (2024). Passenger valuation of interchanges in urban public transport. 

Journal of Public Transportation , 26 , 100089. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JPUBTR.2024.100089 

Young, M., & Blainey, S. (2018). Railway station choice modelling: A review of methods and evidence. 

Transport Reviews , 38 (2), 232 –251. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/01441647.2017.1326537;JOURNAL:JOURNAL:TTRV20;REQUESTEDJOURN 

AL:JOURNAL:TTRV20;WGROUP:STRING:PUBLICATION 24 

# Appendix 

# A.  Mode  aggregation 

In the MPN, a total of 29 different modes  can be  recorded. In our dataset, 23  appear at least once as 

either an access, main or egress mode. To simplify the choice model estimation, we aggregate them 

into five mode groups.  Table  4 presents the frequency with which each mode appears within the group 

and trip leg . For  clarity’s  sake, if the mode does not appear at all in a specific trip leg (0%), it is not shown 

at all. 

Table  4. Mode aggregation and share of trips made by each mode within each group per trip leg 

Aggregate 

modes 

Originally coded modes  access  main  egress 

Walking  Walking  100.0%  98.1%  99.7% 

Other  * 1.9%  0.3% 

Cycling  Bicycle, racing bicycle  83.6%  58.3%  72.2% 

Electric bicycle, e -bike  11.9%  36.7%  5.6% 

Public Transport rental bicycle  0.1%  11.1% 

Folding bicycle  3.0%  0.4%  11.1% 

Speed pedelec (max. 45 km/h, helmet required)  0.5% 

Scooter  2.3% 

Moped  1.5%  1.9% 

Bus/Tram/Metro  Express tram/metro  16.7%  38.1%  24.5% 

Tram  11.9%  14.4%  24.5% 

Bus  71.4%  47.5%  51.0% 

Train  Train  100.0% 

Car  Car as driver (gasoline, diesel or LPG)  61.8%  65.8% 

Car as driver (electric, hydrogen or hybrid)  8.8%  9.8% 

Car as passenger (gasoline, diesel or LPG)  20.6%  17.9%  66.7% 

Car as passenger (electric, hydrogen or hybrid)  8.8%  2.6%  33.3% 

Van  2.0% 

Motorcycle  0.7% 

Camper  0.1% 

Handicap -accessible vehicle  0.7% 

Taxi  0.4% 

Touring car/bus (not Public Transport)  0.1%  

> *Trips recorded as “ Other” are individually inspected (3 cases) and based on the travel distance and time,
> we conclude they can all be classified as walking

25 

# B.  Nesting structures 

We test a series of nesting structures to see which best captures the observed choice behaviour. We 

consider all train -related alternatives for potential nesting structures.  Table  5 shows that the simplest 

structure, with a single nest with all train alternatives performs best both in terms of model fit and 

parsimony. 

Other nesting structures are based on a shared access/egress mode/station, i.e. all alternatives that 

include cycling as an access mode or all alternatives egressing at the closest station etc. 

We also test combinations of two of these combined, for example all alternatives that include using BTM 

to the third closest station or all alternatives that use walking on both the access and egress side.  

> Table 5. Model outcomes for different nesting structures

Nesting structure  Number of nests  Final LL  BIC 

Train  1 -3,690  7,534 

Access modes  4 -3,718  7,607 

Access stations  3 -3,716  7,603 

Egress modes  3 -3,715  7,592 

Egress stations  3 -3,718  7,608 

Access modes + stations  12  -3,717  7,674 

Egress modes + stations  9 -3,716  7,646 

Access + egress modes  12  -3,704  7,647 

Access + egress stations  9 -3,726  7,666 26 

# C.  Market share calculations 

To calculate the market shares across different distance, we use the average values from our dataset. 

When varying the market share over egress distances, we use the average access leg and main leg 

distance to calculate the contribution of utility from those legs, with the utility contribution of the egress 

leg varying based on the distance. Equally, we us e average main leg and egress leg distances when 

varying the access leg distance. 

Next, as the used distances are Euclidian (great circle distance), we use the per -mode distance data 

obtained through the APIs to determine the detour factor of each m ode.  This is the ratio between the 

actual distance and the Euclidian distance between two points. To obtain travel time of each mode, we 

use the average speed per mode and leg, which we determine based on travel distance and travel time 

which in turn also come  from the API data.  Given th at the  average trip  is quite long  (>35km), we only 

consid er train and car as viable main modes. T he average detour factors and speeds per mode and leg 

are listed in  Table  6.

For the context parameters, we take the average effect of car ownership interaction and trip purpose 

interaction. For the urbanisation level, we assume the origin is non -urban and the destination is highly 

urban.  For the rest, we use the parameters as reported in  Table  2 in Section  5. 

> Table 6. Detour factors and average speeds per mode and leg

Detour factor  Average speed [km/h] 

Access leg  Main leg  Egress leg  Access leg  Main leg  Egress leg 

Average Euclidian 

distance [km]  1.799  35.718  1.121 

Walking  1.286  1.326  4.346  4.357 

Cycling  1.424  1.520  16.660  15.741 

Car  1.860  1.323  27.278  63.059 

BTM  1.860  1 1.860  2 19 .255  19 .255  2

Train  0.967  92.173