Title: Learning Dominant States in Elementary Resource Constrained Shortest Path Problems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.03760v1

Published Time: Wed, 06 May 2026 01:18:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# Learning Dominant States in Elementary Resource Constrained Shortest Path Problems 

Saverio Basso 1, Matteo Salani 11Dalle Molle Institute for Artificial Intelligence (IDSIA), USI-SUPSI, Lugano, Switzerland 

Abstract 

In this work, we investigate whether machine learning can be leveraged to identify promising states in dynamic programming algorithms, focusing on Elementary Resource Constrained Shortest Path Problems (ERCSPP). More in detail, we solved 41 single resource instances from SPPRCLIB using iterative relaxation techniques through the PathWyse library, sys-tematically collecting all generated states (i.e. labels). We designed ad-hoc features computable in constant time and constructed two datasets: one containing all generated labels (G) and another with only those in-serted into data pools (I), totaling several hundred million labels. Machine learning tools are then employed to explore these datasets, revealing significant patterns between successive relaxations. Leveraging these insights, we propose a normalization approach and apply supervised learning techniques to distinguish dominating states, both within subse-quent relaxations of the same problem and in previously unseen instances. Our results demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach on Dataset G, while for Dataset I, performance varies, showing strong results within the same instance but declining for unseen ones. Overall, these findings open new perspectives for the development of data-driven dynamic program-ming algorithms. 

# 1 Introduction 

The shortest path problem is one of the most studied combinatorial prob-lems. While original attempts can be dated back to the 19th century in methods to solve path finding in mazes (Lucas [1882] and Tarry [1895]), modern mathematical study of the shortest path problem began in the mid-20th century with the work by Dijkstra [1959]. The interested reader can discover the history of the shortest path problem in Schrijver [2012]. The shortest path problem is efficiently solvable in polynomial time. However, the introduction of resource constraints transforms it into a significantly more complex and challenging problem, in the class of NP-Hard problems. These constraints can include limits on time, cost, or other resources that must be managed along the path. Another layer of complexity is added when the underlying network contains negative cost cycles. These cycles can lead to situations where the total path cost can be reduced by traversing the cycle repeatedly. The solution to this vari-ant asks for the computation of the Elementary Shortest Path Problem with Resource Constraints (ESPPRC). There are several practically rele-vant applications of the ESPPRC in transportation, telecommunication, finance, and scheduling. Most notably, the ESPPRC is found as sub-problem in routing and workforce scheduling problems solved by column generation. 

1

> arXiv:2605.03760v1 [math.OC] 5 May 2026

Recently, data-driven algorithms have emerged as complementary tools to tackle combinatorial optimization problems. In particular, leveraging on large datasets, Machine Learning (ML) approaches are capable of ef-fectively driving search algorithms in the very large solution space of com-binatorial problems. While pioneering work in the direction of combining learning and optimization dates back to the early 1990s, see for exam-ple Dorigo [1992], this research avenue has been reshaped more recently towards the integration of ML to drive inner decisions of more complex algorithms for combinatorial optimization, Bengio et al. [2021]. In this work, we focus on the ESPPRC and on one of the state of the art algorithms to solve the problem to proven optimality. Namely, we focus on the Decremental State Space Relaxation algorithm (DSSR) [Righini and Salani, 2008] which is based on a dynamic programming approach capable of effectively explore the large state space associated to the problem. We intend to explore the effectiveness of ML techniques to identify promising states (later on called Pareto states ) that are worth exploring first. In fact, the performance of the DSSR algorithm is strongly influenced by the state space exploration policy. For example, Table 1 illustrates the number of states explored (Attempts) and the percentage of those inserted in data pools (Success) under two different strategies when solving test-bed ESPPRC instances with one resource constraint. The node policy explores all the unexplored states associated with a node of the network before moving to the next node, while the greedy policy explores the most promising state in the whole network first. Overall, the node policy proved almost three times faster than the greedy policy in all instances. Indeed, these findings further motivate the investigation of data-driven techniques to identify Pareto optimal states as they are generated and explored by the DSSR algorithm. Policy Time [s] Fastest Attempts Success Node policy 50.52 42 1697524652 2.89% Greedy policy 146.16 0 5521806107 1.85% 

Table 1: Labeling algorithm profiling over different extension policies when solving ESPPRC instances. 

The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we briefly review the most relevant contributions to solve the (E)SPPRC. Section 3 recalls the details of the selected labeling algorithm for the problem and defines fun-damental research questions. The generation of the datasets used in the paper is introduced in Section 4. Sections 5 and 6 contain an exploratory analysis of the dataset, normalization procedures and machine learning approaches to distinguish between Pareto and Dominated states. Finally, Section 7 portraits some conclusive remarks and outlines future work. 

# 2 Literature 

The body of literature dedicated to path finding in networks is massive, therefore, beside the already mentioned paper on the history of the short-est path [Schrijver, 2012], we limit ourselves to address the reader to Madkour et al. [2017]. Instead, in this section we focus on contributions 

2to solve the (E)SPPRC, referring first to the surveys of Irnich and De-saulniers [2005] and Pugliese and Guerriero [2013]. Early approaches for SPPRC include pre-processing procedures and Branch & Bound [Beasley and Christofides, 1989] and Lagrangian re-laxations and enumeration of near-shortest paths [Carlyle et al., 2008]. The most successful algorithms are based on Dynamic Programming label-ing algorithms [Mehlhorn and Ziegelmann, 2000, Dumitrescu and Boland, 2003, Desrochers and Soumis, 1988] further improved by bi-directional search [Righini and Salani, 2006] with dynamic balancing [Tilk et al., 2017], bucket based approaches [Pecin et al., 2017, Sadykov et al., 2020] and iterative relaxation techniques [Righini and Salani, 2008], [Baldacci et al., 2011], [Martinelli et al., 2014], [Bulh˜ oes et al., 2018] and [Costa et al., 2021]. For some applications, finding super-optimal non-elementary paths is relevant and in such cases efficient algorithms can be found in [Ir-nich and Villeneuve, 2006] and [Desaulniers et al., 2008] During the last years, Machine Learning (ML) techniques for the res-olution of combinatorial optimization problems has become a popular trend. Its use can be classified, according to [Bengio et al., 2021], as end-to-end, algorithm selection and configuration, and embedded in opti-mization algorithms. Reviewing literature contributions for end-to-end ML approaches for CO goes beyond the scope of this work, but the interested reader can explore the trending topic of Neural Combinatorial Optimization starting from the survey by Wu et al. [2024]. A recent survey on the application of ML to Vehicle routing problems can be found in Shahbazian et al. [2024]. For what concerns algorithm selection and configuration, ML is profi-ciently used in different ways. In Kruber et al. [2017], the authors explore automatic Dantzig-Wolfe decompositions, predicting if a given problem is suitable for a successful decomposition approach and, in case of a posi-tive result, what algorithm should provide the best one. Li et al. [2023] accelerates the solution of MILP problems by configuring the separators used to generate cutting planes. Similarly, Chmiela et al. [2021] proposes data-driven techniques for configuring the scheduling of heuristics proce-dures in exact MILP solvers. Finally, machine learning techniques can be 

integrated in the optimization process . In this setting, we can find works focused on integrating learning and branching [Lodi and Zarpellon, 2017] and studies where decision trees have been used to imitate strong branch-ing policies in Alvarez et al. [2014], resulting in fast approximations. In Morabit et al. [2021] instead machine learning is used to speed-up the re-optimization of the master problem during column generation, through a data driven selection of the most promising columns. Finally, the authors of V´ aclav´ ık et al. [2018] focus on the pricing problem, exploiting knowledge gained from previous iterations to estimate upper bounds to reduce the solutions space in future iterations, through the means of generic online machine learning methods, providing considerable CPU time gains. To the best of our knowledge, very few works have tackled directly the integration of Machine Learning for Shortest Path Problems. Re-cently, Morabit et al. [2023] studied how to speed-up shortest paths sub-problems in vehicle routing and crew scheduling column generation algo-rithms. They exploit data driven classifiers trained on previous executions to perform arc selection, reducing effectively the size of the network and providing savings up to 40% of computing time. In Xu et al. [2025], the authors utilize reinforcement learning to select heuristics used to prune the network to speed up column generation. In Morabit et al. [2024] 

3instead, the authors propose a learned heuristic for the re-optimization of recurring routing problems, that present small differences in data, by predicting and fixing edges having high chances of being part of the so-lution at each iteration of the algorithm. Indeed, we found no work that intersects machine learning with RCSPP to provide methodological im-provements except that of Ondei et al. [2024] where authors attempt to forecast the feasibility of a partial path through data-driven techniques. 

# 3 Labeling algorithms for ESPPRC 

The ESPPRC is defined on a graph G(N, A ), which we assume directed, composed of a node set N and an arc set A. The problem asks to find a minimum cost elementary path, i.e. a finite sequence of consecutive arcs in which every node n ∈ N appears at most once, from a source node s ∈ N to a destination node d ∈ N . The cost is accumulated when traversing arcs along the path. We remark that no assumption are taken on the cost of the arcs and the graph may possess negative cost cycles. State of the art algorithms to solve the ESPPRC are based on a Dy-namic Programming (DP) framework. Modern techniques include bi-directional search [Righini and Salani, 2006], [Tilk et al., 2017], bucket based approaches [Pecin et al., 2017, Sadykov et al., 2020] and advanced relaxation schemes [Righini and Salani, 2008], [Baldacci et al., 2011] and their hybridizations [Martinelli et al., 2014]. In dynamic programming, a state associated with vertex i ∈ N repre-sents a partial path from the source node s to the node i. Indeed, different states can be associated with the same node and they correspond to dif-ferent partial paths. The DP algorithm iteratively extends states until no further extensions are possible and among all feasible states reaching the destination node d the one with minimal cost represent the optimal solution to the ESPPRC. Each state is encoded in a label, in bi-directional dynamic program-ming called forward and backward labels. Each of them stores the accu-mulated cost, the accumulated resources consumption and a binary vector that keeps track of the visited nodes in the partial path. Formally a label 

lfi representing a partial path ending at node i is a tuple: 

lfi = ( i, c, S, R ) (1) where i is the last node visited in the partial path, c is the accumulated cost, S is a binary vector that keep tracks of the visited nodes in the partial path and R is the so called resource vector that keeps track of the consumption of each resource. Bi-directional dynamic programming lim-its the extension of forward and backward states by selecting a monotone resource, called critical resource , and extending labels for which its con-sumption is less than a given threshold T . Such threshold can be adjusted dynamically in order to keep the dimensions of the forward and backward sets of labels as balanced as possible [Tilk et al., 2017]. Regardless of the extension direction, given two labels l1,i = ( i, c 1, S 1, R 1)and l2,i = ( i, c 2, S 2, R 2) ending at the same node i, l1 dominates l2 iif: 

c1 ≤ c2

S1 ⊆ S2

R1,r ≤ R2,r ∀r ∈ R

4and at least one inequality is strict. Dominated labels can be safely dis-carded as they will not lead to an optimal solution. Labels are managed in label pools , normally associated to the nodes of the original graph or to the nodes of a specific data structure called bucket graph. Often, these label pools are implemented with priority queues so that a partial ordering between labels can be enforced. Every label that is considered during the execution of the algorithm can be therefore classified as Generated and Dominated ( GD ), that is, generated by the algorithm but discarded because a dominating label is already present in the label pool, Generated and Inserted ( GI ), that is generated by the algorithm inserted in the label pool but later on dominated by a better label, Pareto (P ) that is a label generated by the algorithm, inserted in the label pool and not dominated in any pairwise dominance check. An effective strategy for addressing the ESPPRC involves iterative relaxation. This approach aims at reducing the number of labels to be generated by dynamic programming by solving relaxations of the origi-nal problem and exploiting its optimal solution to drive the algorithm. The basic idea behind that scheme is that only a subset of the nodes of the network are relevant to compute the optimal solution without cycles. Therefore, the binary vector S should be restricted only to those nodes. As a result, the domination criteria between labels is also relaxed and the algorithm generates less labels. At the same time, cycles on the nodes not considered in the set S are not prohibited any longer. The Decremental state space relaxation scheme (DSSR [Righini and Salani, 2008]) relaxes a large portion of the state space, and iteratively adds nodes until a solution without cycles is found. Attempts to initialize the set S have been explored in [Righini and Salani, 2009]. Another relax-ations scheme, called ng-path relaxation [Baldacci et al., 2011], consists of defining, for each node of the graph, a subset of nodes on which path ele-mentarity is enforced. Hybridizations of the ng-path relaxation with the DSSR scheme are also possible [Martinelli et al., 2014], and, in particular, we focus on the Restricted DSSR (DSSR-R). DSSR-R stores a dedicated set for elementarity at each node and uses a DSSR based approach to iteratively forbid partial paths containing cycles. Namely, when a cycle is found, nodes that appear more than once are inserted in the sets of nodes appearing in the loop only. In the following, we study how data gathered during the DSSR-R procedure can be exploited to determine whether a new state belongs to either GD, GI or P set. In particular, we are interested in answering two research questions: 1. is it possible to discriminate between Pareto and Dominated labels, with data driven techniques, by only looking at static properties of the labels? 2. is it possible to determine whether a label about to be inserted in a label pool will eventually be dominated by a label that has not yet been generated, thus potentially allowing us to identify such cases in advance? To answer these questions, in the following, we specifically generate and analyze two datasets, G and I, and investigate the contexts in which different types of labels can be discriminated, considering both offline and online learning scenarios. 

54 Datasets Generation 

The first challenge of this work was the generation of a representative and diversified dataset, consisting of both Pareto and dominated labels for different instances, along with the careful design of meaningful features that could be computed in trivial time. Efficient feature computation is indeed crucial for this work, as recording states generated by dynamic programming algorithms can introduce overhead. 

Instances More in detail, we generated our data starting from 41 prob-lems of SPPRCLIB [2008], an online repository of resource constrained shortest path problems. In this collection, all instances present complete graphs with cycles, having positive travel distances and prizes that can be collected (thus allowing the existence of cycles), and a single capac-ity constraint. They are organized in different classes (A, B, E, G, M, P) that describe different instance generation approaches about capacity, node positioning and node clustering. Further details about how these sets were generated can be found in Uchoa et al. [2017]. 

Labels generation We solved each problem through a modified ver-sion of PathWyse 1.0 [Salani et al., 2024a], an open source library for RCSPP, which employs a dynamic programming labeling algorithm and relaxation techniques, with the following settings: parallel bidirectional search, with an even fixed split of 50% of the critical resource budget for each direction, DSSR-R (with two-cycle elimination), no NG-routes, node based extension strategy, Pareto join technique (see Salani et al. [2024b]). All runs were performed on a machine with an eight-core Intel i9-11900 @2.50 GHz, 32GB RAM and Kubuntu 24.04 OS. We used the same ma-chine in every subsequent analysis. A one-hour time limit was set for the simulations, resulting in three unsolved instances. An additional instance was discarded during pre-processing operations, thus reducing the overall dataset to 41 instances. The final list of problems is reported in Section A.1, in the Appendix. Since we used DSSR-R, for each algorithm iteration, we solved a differ-ent relaxation of the problem, and saved features for every label generated during optimization for both backward and forward search: to this end, we designed and implemented new data collection methods for recording and storing labels efficiently. 

Features We defined static properties, a set of characteristics that could describe a (partial) path while requiring no additional computa-tional effort. In our setting, static features are accessed in constant time when a label is generated. This approach was a key element during feature design, offering the dual benefit of controlling overhead in dataset genera-tion while potentially enabling low-latency machine learning applications for future algorithms. More specifically, for each label, we stored an identifier (iteration) that tracks the DSSR-R relaxation responsible for generating it, along with 23 additional features describing the path. These included the overall cost (objective), consumption of the critical resource (consumption critical), and tour-related features such as the length (tour length), the number of visited nodes, the number of unreachable nodes, and more. Additionally, we stored the full set of visited nodes used by the algorithm in the form of bitsets. We also introduced an additional feature, named efficiency, which 

6serves as a proxy for the quality of a label by accounting for both its cost and critical consumption. The definition and computation of this feature are detailed during the normalization process, as described in Section 5.1. Features that detail the state of the network at the time a label was generated as well. These include the number of labels currently in the net-work for a forward or backward search (nlabels network), the number of dominated labels (nlabels dominated network), the number of extended labels (nlabels closed network), and the number of labels pending pro-cessing (nlabels open network). We also tracked similar information for the label pools, which were associated with each node by PathWyse. Finally, we labeled each entry (i.e. partial path) under the dominated 

feature, marking labels from sets GD and GI as Dominated (1), and labels from set P as Pareto (0). These values are then used as classes in the next analyses, allowing us to distinguish between dominated and non-dominated labels. The full list of features can be found in the Appendix, in Section A.2. After preliminary experiments, we performed feature selection by discarding a small subset of features that could either not be used directly, such as the full bitsets, or identifiers (for the run or the nodes). We also performed Principal Component Analysis in Section 5. Overall, we marked with an asterisk the features in the Appendix that were selected for analysis with machine learning models in Section 6. 

Datasets We consolidated forward and backward labels of all instances, from every DSSR-R iteration, into two primary datasets: 

• Dataset G contains every label that has been generated by the labeling algorithm (P, GD, GI). 

• Dataset I includes only labels that have been inserted in data struc-tures (P, GI). Therefore, Dataset I is a subset of Dataset G. A summary of the datasets is reported in Table 2: for both datasets and every instance class, we report the number of problems, the overall number of generated labels, the percentage of Pareto ones, the average number of DSSR-R iterations required to solve an instance and the average number of labels available at each DSSR-R iteration. 

Dataset G This dataset includes all the labels that are generated by the algorithm: it contains all Pareto labels (P) and all dominated labels that are either discarded before insertion (Generated and Dominated, GD) or afterwards (Generated and Inserted, GI), when a new, more promising label is inserted in the same label pool. This means, that all dynamic programming states, even suboptimal ones, are recorded for both forward and backward search. Therefore, as reported in Table 2, this dataset consists of 41 instances, for about 1 billion records. Problems were solved, on average, in approxi-mately 15 iterations of DSSR-R, with around 930,000 labels available per iteration. Indeed, the majority of instances exhibited more than 100,000 labels per iteration: this is summarized by the histogram shown in Fig-ure 1a. We note that instances of class M have one order of magnitude more records compared to the other classes. We also observe that the dataset is clearly unbalanced, as the negative class Pareto represents only about 0.89% of total records of the dataset. Indeed, out of all the possible states, only a very small subset of labels is dominating, confirming the importance of strong extension and dominance rules. 

7We remark that, overall, generating Dataset G required, on average, 54% more time with respect to a standard PathWyse optimization run. This was expected, given the high number of records, and overhead can be reduced if data storage on disk is not necessary. Additional memory and efficiency strategies can be adopted if one is interested in storing only the labels from a single iteration. 

Dataset I This dataset collects instead, only labels that passed suc-cessfully the insertion step, that is, at generation time, there were no other labels dominating them. Therefore, it contains Pareto labels (P) and labels that were inserted in data structures but discarded after a more promising label was generated at a later point of the algorithm (Generated and Inserted, GI). The dataset contains data for all 41 instances, for a total of 32 mil-lion records. In general, there are two order of magnitude fewer labels compared to Dataset G. Only about 30,000 records are available for each DSSR-R iteration. This trend is illustrated in Figure 1b where only few instances have more than 50,000 records per iteration. This pattern is especially prominent for instances of class E, whereas problems of class M have the largest sets of labels. Unlike Dataset G, this dataset is more balanced: on average, Pareto labels account for over 30% of the total. Given the smaller number of labels, the generation of Dataset I is on average only 25% slower compared to the standard PathWyse solution. Dataset Class Inst. Labels Pareto DSSR-R It. Labels per It. GA 10 28519876 2.80% 13.50 210351.84 B 7 26868310 3.11% 15.86 227244.19 E 6 8007201 2.91% 10.33 205046.04 M 3 1051067897 0.69% 40.00 8461281.09 P 15 115294847 1.57% 13.07 522248.51 Overall 41 1229758131 0.89% 15.22 930294.51 IA 10 1824155 43.70% 13.50 13480.59 B 7 2060712 40.55% 15.86 17848.01 E 6 475798 48.90% 10.33 10331.22 M 3 23303860 31.07% 40.00 188299.21 P 15 4704911 38.50% 13.07 21588.57 Overall 41 32369436 33.73% 15.22 29523.30 

Table 2: Summary of Dataset G and Dataset I. For each problem class, number of instances, number of labels, percentage of Pareto labels, average number of DSSR-R iterations and average number of labels per iteration. 

# 5 Exploratory analysis of the dataset 

In this section, we present an exploratory investigation of the datasets, covering key feature, instance and correlation analysis. These experiments are primarily conducted on a per-instance basis, to optimize memory us-age, and on the last iteration of the algorithm, where solving the relaxation 

8(a) Dataset G (b) Dataset I 

Figure 1: Average number of labels per iteration, for each instance. 

yields the optimal solution, although we also include some study across it-erations (DSSR-R iterations). Finally, we design and detail normalization procedures at the end of this section. All the analyses were performed in Python 3.10. 

Analysis 1: Pareto vs Dominated labels, by instance In the following, we summarize visually the distribution of labels for represen-tative instances of Dataset G (resp. Dataset I) in Figure 2 (resp. Figure 3). Each label is represented with its objective value on the y-axis and its critical resource consumption on the x-axis. Pareto labels are marked in red, while Dominated labels are shown in blue. For Dataset G, we observe that the few existing Pareto labels generally have low objective values; as expected, when the cost increases, most labels are Dominated. An exception to this behavior is shown in Figure 2b (and two others), where the two searches (forward and backward) produce distinct sets of labels. This difference arises from the varying prize distributions around the source and destination nodes. For example, nodes near the source may have higher prizes, while those closer to the destination may exhibit strictly lower prizes. In the following, we refer to these problems as split 

instances. Still, for this dataset, 37 problems out 41 were similar to 2a. Finally, a single instance, M-n101-k10 , shown in Figure 2c presents in-stead a stack-like structure, since resource consumption is represented by discrete multipliers of 10. For dataset I, the remaining Dominated labels are much more inter-mingled with the Pareto labels, suggesting a greater overlap between the two sets. While most instances (35) are similar to Figure 3a, some (5) reveal the same split distribution (see Figure 3b) as reported for Dataset G. Finally, as before, only M-n101-k10 shows a stack-like structure. Overall, we observe that, as also highlighted in Table 2, most labels generated by dynamic programming algorithms are suboptimal (approxi-mately, 99% of the total). Given the small size of Dataset I, it is notable that state-of-the-art algorithms already employ robust rules to efficiently discard dominated labels before insertion, leaving mostly promising ones. While this is expected, we believe there is still potential for improvement by accelerating insertion checks and further reducing the number of inser-tions through the right selection of candidate labels for extension. Indeed, choosing the right candidate remains a critical factor in controlling the combinatorial explosion of labels. 

9(a) 

> (b)
> (c)

Figure 2: Dataset G. Scatter plot of Label objective (y-axis) against critical resource (x-axis). Pareto labels are marked in red, while dominated ones in blue. 10 Analysis 2: Features distribution We conducted a more detailed analysis of the feature distributions utilized by the dominance functions during the algorithm’s execution. In particular, we focused on the ob-jective distributions for Pareto and Dominated labels in both Dataset G and Dataset I. The corresponding boxplots, for selected instances, are presented in Figure 4 and Figure 5, respectively. For Dataset G, objective distribution between the two type of labels is very different: in fact, we observe that the third quartile (Q3) of the Pareto-optimal ones is lower than the first quartile (Q1) of the dominated labels. This is true for SP-PRCBLIB, for all instances but split ones, due to forward and backward labels having different cost distribution. Indeed, dominated labels have a very high objective, and simple rule-based thresholds might be able to discriminate most labels between the two sets. This is not consistent with Dataset I, where Pareto-optimal and domi-nated labels show similar objective distribution. This suggests that inser-tion is efficient, leaving only labels that are quite similar to Pareto-optimal ones: in this case, the objective cost alone is not sufficient as a proxy to describe the quality of a label. We also examined other features, including critical resource consump-tion, the number of visited nodes, and tour length. However, in every case, Pareto-optimal and dominated labels showed similar distributions, making it challenging to discriminate between the two sets. This obser-vation applies to both datasets and is illustrated in Figure 6 for critical resource consumption. 

Analysis 3: Correlation analysis and Principal Components Analysis For each instance, we also measured the linear correlation between each feature and the binary label type to assess how well each feature separates the Pareto (0) and Dominated (1) classes. Results are reported in Table 3 for both Dataset G and I. For each fea-ture, we report the average, minimum, maximum and average correlation across all instances. We remark that values closer to 1 or −1 are desirable, as they indicate stronger positive or negative correlations, respectively. Indeed, we found that no single feature exhibits a strong correlation with the label type. Specifically, for Dataset G, most features show an average correlation close to 0, albeit the objective is the only feature with weak positive correlation. The number of unreachable and visited nodes show instead weak negative correlation. Still, objective, tour length, number of unreachable nodes and number of visited nodes show a weak to moderate relationship with the label type on a limited number of in-stances. Although the results for Dataset I are similar, we observe that, un-like Dataset G, the objective correlation is lower. More importantly, we note a moderate negative correlation, on average, with the features that describe the state of the network. Specifically, the values suggest that as the number of labels increases and the label pools become richer in Pareto labels, the algorithm improves at performing insertion, leading to fewer dominated labels being inserted into the pools. We also tested Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and, based on the eigenvalues criterion, identified 10 significant components. The aver-age absolute score of the components most strongly correlated with the 

11 (a) 

> (b)
> (c)

Figure 3: Dataset I. Scatter plot of Label objective (y-axis) against critical resource (x-axis). Pareto labels are marked in red, while dominated ones in blue. 12 (a) (b) 

Figure 4: Dataset G. Boxplot of objective for Pareto and dominated labels.  

> (a) (b)

Figure 5: Dataset I. Boxplot of objective for Pareto and dominated labels.  

> (a) Dataset G (b) Dataset I

Figure 6: Boxplot of critical resource consumption for Pareto and dominated labels. 13 Dataset G Dataset I Feature min max avg min max avg node -0.05 0.03 -0.01 -0.11 0.08 -0.02 predecessor -0.05 0.03 0.01 -0.43 0.05 -0.16 objective -0.14 0.36 0.22 -0.12 0.36 0.16 consumption critical 0.03 0.27 0.11 -0.01 0.26 0.12 tour length 0.02 0.37 0.10 -0.18 0.16 -0.05 nunreachable -0.34 -0.03 -0.21 -0.28 -0.01 -0.17 nvisited -0.34 -0.06 -0.21 -0.28 -0.03 -0.17 nvisited unaltered 0.01 0.38 0.10 -0.18 0.16 -0.04 repeated visits -0.04 0.02 -0.01 -0.11 0.06 -0.03 nlabels network -0.02 0.20 0.04 -0.44 -0.22 -0.36 nlabels open network 0.00 0.09 0.03 -0.17 0.13 -0.02 nlabels closed network -0.02 0.17 0.03 -0.48 -0.24 -0.39 nlabels dominated network -0.02 0.18 0.04 -0.44 -0.24 -0.37 nlabels node -0.29 0.19 -0.11 -0.37 -0.15 -0.28 nlabels open node -0.22 0.03 -0.10 -0.22 0.05 -0.09 nlabels closed node -0.26 0.12 -0.08 -0.39 -0.19 -0.29 Table 3: Dataset G and I. Correlation analysis between main features and target class (Pareto-Dominated). 

label type was 0.2 for Dataset G and 0.33 for Dataset I. Given the dataset’s relatively modest dimensionality and the lack of improvement in correla-tion scores, we conducted the subsequent experiments using the full set of selected features. Overall, this analysis suggests that the task to discriminate between Pareto and dominated labels is indeed a non trivial task, as no single feature or component is able to distinguish the sets by itself. 

Analysis 4: DSSR-R iteration analysis When employing Decre-mental State Space Relaxation strategies, algorithms iteratively solve dif-ferent relaxations of the problem. We follow the intuition that two differ-ent subsequent iterations likely share many common labels, and therefore explore, in this analysis, the similarities in the objective and other feature distributions throughout the resolution. More in detail, we present in Figure 7 a box plot for the objective obtained by each DSSR-R iteration, having solved two selected instances of Dataset G. For each instance, we report the distributions for Pareto labels (left) and for Dominated labels (right). In particular, we observe that the the objective remains simi-lar between iterations: although some small differences are present, this holds true for all problems in SPPRCLIB. However, we note that with other configurations, where the budget of a bidirectional search algorithm gets updated between one iteration and the following one, forward and backward search will likely explore the network differently, therefore pro-ducing, overall, a different cost distribution. We report the same analysis for two selected instances of Dataset I, in Figure 8. Indeed, the same con-siderations from before apply, that is, the objective distribution does not differ much, between subsequent iterations. Again, this property remains 

14 (a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

Figure 7: Dataset G. Boxplot of the objective for each iteration of the algorithm. Pareto labels on the left, dominated labels on the right. 

valid for all instances of SPPRCLIB. We also repeated the same analysis also for the critical consumption, where we noticed a modest increase in consumption from iteration to iteration: when solving the more relaxed problems, paths with high resource consumption are likely more easily dominated by super optimal labels. Overall, these results suggest that previous iterations likely contain some information that might prove useful in describing the following ones. This might come in the form of already generated labels, or possible upper or lower bound to costs and so on. Indeed, we detail some of this informa-tion during normalization, in the following subsection, and exploit data from previous iterations in some learning setups. 

# 5.1 Normalization 

In this section, we explain how we normalized our dataset. Since it con-tains data from solving various problems, some features, particularly dy-namic ones such as the objective value, can vary significantly in scale across instances. Normalization was therefore essential to ensure that fea-tures with different scales, also coming from different problem instances, contribute equally during model training. Additionally, normalized data is the requirement for some machine learning models. Still, normalizing dynamic features like the objective value posed specific challenges due to their strong dependence on the instance context. Indeed, solution-related characteristics can vary widely across instances, influenced by fac-tors such as network topology, cost structures, resource consumption, and more. Consequently, we explored several normalization strategies, care-fully weighing their effectiveness and computational impact. Therefore, 

15 (a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

Figure 8: Dataset I. Boxplot of the objective for each iteration of the algorithm. Pareto labels on the left, dominated labels on the right. 

in the following, each instance is normalized using problem-specific data, dynamic information available during label generation, or information de-rived from the previous DSSR-R iteration, which we accessed in constant time. Indeed, we avoid using information gathered across all instances, such as the lowest bound found or the highest number of nodes, as these may overlook the unique characteristics of new, unseen instances and hin-der the generalization to the current ones. After conducting preliminary experiments, we decided to use prob-lem data to normalize the critical resource consumption. More in detail, we used the upper bound, that is, the overall budget as the normaliza-tion factor. For node-related features, such as the number of visited or unreachable nodes, we used the total number of nodes as the reference. For normalizing the number of cycles in a path, we used the tour length of the label, instead. Additionally, we were able to normalize some features related to the network status by using the total number of labels stored in the network at the time of label generation. Specifically, we normalized the number of labels that were yet to be extended (open), already extended (closed), and dominated. At the same time, since we used a queue as a label pool for each node, we also normalized the number of labels that had already been extended (closed) and those yet to be extended (open) with the queue size. Overall, we found no straightforward solution that used instance spe-cific characteristics for normalizing the objective, the tour length of a path, or the total number of labels stored in the network or queue. Therefore, based on the results of Analysis 4, we explored whether using information from previous DSSR-R iterations of the same instance could be helpful. To this end, we discarded data from the first relaxation of each problem, 

16 (a) (b) 

Figure 9: Dataset G. Plotting objective normalized with previous data (Prev) against objective normalized with current data (Oracle). 

(a) (b) 

Figure 10: Dataset I. Plotting objective normalized with previous data (Prev) against objective normalized with current data (Oracle). 

as no previous relaxation data was available at that point. After some experiments, we found that employing a min-max normalization by using the objective of the partial paths obtained in the previous iteration worked best for our goal. More in detail, for a label l in relaxation iteration i, we used the objective from the label set L of iteration i − 1 to normalize it. 

obj l,norm = obj l − min Li−1 {obj }

max Li−1 {obj } − min Li−1 {obj } (2) For validation purposes we also performed a min-max normalization by using the full label set of the current iteration. We call this normalization Oracle, as it can be only be performed a posteriori, once the relaxation has been fully solved. We plot our normalized objective (Prev, in orange) against the Oracle normalization (in blue) for the last iteration of selected instances in Figure 9 and Figure 10 for Dataset G and I, respectively. Overall, we observed no differences in normalization scores for all in-stances but two. That is, the majority of instances shows a scatter plot similar to 9a and 10a. For the remaining two, the error of normalized scores was less than 0.02 (see Figures 9b, 10b). 

17 We found this approach to normalization to be suitable. Alternative strategies, including the z-score, were also considered and showed similar performance. However, we note some drawbacks: if the search budget is updated at the end of a DSSR-R iteration, the objective distribution in the next iteration will likely change, which in turn may affect the nor-malization process. This issue, however, can be avoided by selecting a fixed budget at initialization, possibly after some pre-processing, and by preventing dynamic updates. Overall, this strategy proves particularly ef-fective because DSSR-R updates the bitsets of only a subset of the network nodes at each iteration. In principle, this means that each relaxation step is similar to the previous ones. Preliminary experiments confirm that this normalization strategy remains effective even when applied to standard DSSR methods, although the resulting accuracy is lower. We identified no consistent technique to normalize the number of la-bels and the tour length. For the number of labels, we used the number obtained after solving the previous relaxation. However, since DSSR-R solves progressively less relaxed problems, the number of labels tends to increase from one iteration to the next one: as a result, achieving a 0 to 1 normalization was not possible. For the tour length, we used the length of the longest path found in the previous optimization round as the nor-malization factor. While one could consider using the overall number of nodes as an alternative, this could pose issues in large networks with short paths, where such a normalization would compress the scores, resulting in values close to 0. Finally, we also designed an additional feature, called efficiency, as a possible proxy of the quality of the label. For a given label l we compute it as follows: 

ef f l = 1 − obj l,norm ∗ consumption critical l,norm (3) That is, the efficiency score is high if both the objective and the consump-tion critical are low. We included this feature in subsequent analyses that use normalized features, still, we note that we found no strong direct correlation with the label type. 

# 6 Learning to discriminate labels 

Following the results of the previous analyses, we turned our attention to a more complex question: whether combinations of features exist that can distinguish between Pareto and Dominated Labels, and, if so, to under-stand which setups make these classifiers work effectively. Therefore, we explored various policies to train supervised models for both Datasets G and I. We propose settings that incorporate inter-instance models, as well as those that operate strictly within individual instances. In the first case, we consider a scenario where a set of problems has already been solved, their labels have been collected, and one or several models have been trained offline using different strategies. These models are then tested on the labels of new, unseen problems. We report this case in subsection 6.2. In contrast, the second setup is presented in 6.3 and it involves facing a completely new problem, when no pre-existing models are available. In this case, we simulate having access to only a subset of the available data from the current problem to train a model online, on the fly, and then use it to distinguish upcoming promising labels. 

18 6.1 Training strategy 

In this subsection, we describe the policy that we used in 6.2 and 6.3 to train our models. First, we always trained using data from a single iteration of DSSR, typically the latest available at run time. In what follows, we describe the setup for training models on both single instances and aggregated groups of instances. Given that the class distribution can be very imbalanced, particularly in Dataset G, we applied sampling to ensure a 1:1 ratio between Pareto and Dominated labels for each instance. Specifically, we sampled approx-imately 80% of the number of labels in the minority class and matched that count with an equal number of labels from the majority class. The remaining labels were reserved for validation purposes. Without propor-tional sampling, models trained on Dataset G would tend to be biased toward predicting Dominated labels. When training on data coming from multiple instances, we took into account that the total number of generated labels can vary significantly across them. To prevent a single instance from dominating the training data, we limited the size of the sample, for each instance, by using the median number of labels from the minority class across the group. After preliminary experiments, we chose to train XGBoost (version 2.1.1) classifiers using the default settings. The dominated feature (0 – Pareto, 1 – Dominated) served as the label for the classifier, while the fea-tures marked with an asterisk in Section A.2 of the appendix were used as input. This model proved suitable for our needs, as it accommodates both normalized and non-normalized data. While preliminary tuning did not yield significant gains, a more systematic exploration of hyperparameter optimization could potentially warrant further investigations. Overall, we found this setup to be the best performing one in our early evaluations. We discuss additional details regarding training also in the following subsections, while full validation results are reported in the Appendix, in A.3. 

# 6.2 Offline learning 

We focus on the first ambitious task, that is understanding if, given the labels generated by solving an instance or a collection of instances, it is possible to discriminate among Pareto and Dominated labels of a pre-viously unknown problem. To this end, we trained our models by ag-gregating instances in accordance to two main strategies: one-vs-all and all-but-one. Additional instance aggregation policies are summarized in the Appendix, in Section A.4. In the following, all training and testing was performed on normalized data from the last relaxation of the involved instances. 

One-vs-All strategy First, we trained a single model for each in-stance, and used it to predict the label type of all the remaining ones, in a standard one-vs-all fashion. We present the test results in Table 4 for both datasets, reporting prediction accuracy for both label types, precision, and F1-score. We re-mark that in our setup, Recall corresponds to the accuracy on Dominated labels. In all these metrics, higher values are preferable. Furthermore, all scores are averaged based on the training model’s class. For example, class A represents the performance of models trained on that class in pre-

19 dicting the label type of all other instances. This includes instances from the same class. We also reported the average absolute difference between the two ac-curacies (Diff.), computed per instance and then averaged across all in-stances in the group. This metric captures the prediction bias of the models toward one of the two classes: a score of 0 means the model clas-sifies Pareto and Dominated labels with equal accuracy on that instance, while a score of 1 indicates the model predicts only one of the two classes for that instance. We observe that prediction is possible on Dataset G, achieving a bal-anced accuracy of 78%. However, while all models generally perform well in identifying the majority class (Dominated labels), their performance on the minority class (Pareto-labels) is notably lower. Specifically, the Diff. column indicates a score difference of about 0.3, strongly highlighting the class imbalance in predictions. Overall, models trained on problems from class A and B yield the most balanced results, whereas those trained on class E and M were significantly more biased toward dominated labels. Interestingly, we also found that classification ability was not symmet-rical. Let δ and γ be two different instances, with models trained on their records denoted as M δ and M γ , respectively. If M δ performs well in pre-dicting γ, there is no guarantee that M γ will perform well in predicting 

δ.On the other hand, tests on Dataset I reveal that distinguishing a Pareto-label from a Dominated label, in the label pool, is significantly more challenging. No model achieves satisfactory performance, and pre-dictions exhibit substantial differences in class scores. This difficulty arises because the labels in the label pools are intrinsically more similar to each other. Additionally, Dataset I contains fewer records, and smaller in-stances likely lack sufficient information for training to generalize effec-tively to other instances. Ultimately, while this strategy appears feasible when enough data is available, individual instances alone do not guarantee accurate general-ization. Consequently, we explored alternative strategies. 

All-but-one strategy Therefore, in our next experiment, we trained an XGBoost model using data from all instances except one, which was reserved for testing. In other words, for each test instance, we trained a model incorporating information from all other instances. This setup simulates a scenario where a model has already been trained, and a com-pletely new, unseen problem, needs to be analyzed. We present the results in Table 5 for both datasets. Specifically, we report the average class-wise accuracies, the average absolute difference between them (Diff.), precision, and F1-score. In this case, average scores are aggregated based on the class of the testing instance. Therefore, every row describes how well the models are able to predict a single instance belonging to that particular class. Overall, for offline learning, this approach yielded the best results. In particular, the results on Dataset G show higher accuracy (85.5% balanced accuracy) and lower Diff. values compared to other strategies. Indeed, this policy enables prediction across all instance classes in Dataset G: on average, no class shows strong bias in its scores. However, the same does not fully hold for Dataset I. While this ap-proach achieved the best results among offline strategies (around 75% balanced accuracy and much lower Diff. values) this level of accuracy, 

20 Training Test Accuracy Dataset Model Inst. Pareto Dominated Diff. Precision F1 GA 400 0.78 0.83 0.26 0.99 0.89 B 280 0.81 0.79 0.26 0.99 0.86 E 240 0.59 0.90 0.40 0.98 0.93 M 120 0.55 0.92 0.41 0.98 0.94 P 600 0.71 0.80 0.36 0.99 0.86 Overall 1640 0.72 0.83 0.33 0.99 0.88 IA 400 0.69 0.63 0.41 0.71 0.60 B 280 0.78 0.55 0.43 0.75 0.57 E 240 0.56 0.76 0.45 0.66 0.66 M 120 0.39 0.85 0.55 0.59 0.67 P 600 0.75 0.55 0.50 0.76 0.55 Overall 1640 0.69 0.62 0.46 0.72 0.59 Table 4: Dataset G and I. Classification results, offline learning. Classifiers were trained on a single instance and tested against the others. 

combined with the still non-negligible Diff. values (albeit significantly lower than those of the one-vs-all strategy), remains substantial enough to impact the quality of predictions. 

Perspectives Overall, these findings suggest that distinguishing label types (Dataset G) in previously unseen problems can be performed with adequate accuracy while classification of labels stored in the pool (Dataset I), is feasible but inconsistent. Indeed, training more accurate predictors for both datasets remains an open research challenge. This may require designing and integrating more dynamic features, which could involve pre-processing steps or, more generally, non-constant computational times: as a result, there may be a trade-off between accuracy and computational efficiency. Finally, we observe that using a fixed 1:1 sampling ratio between label types and a single training configuration may not be suitable for all test instances. A promising direction for improvement would be to introduce pre-processing techniques and cluster similar instances together. In our experiments, we also attempted clustering based on class, that is, grouping problems generated in a similar manner, but this did not lead to the best predictive performance. Developing customized models tailored to specific groups of similar problems, characterized by more than just their instance generation strategy, could prove to be a more effective approach. 

# 6.3 Online learning 

Next, we tried to determine whether Pareto labels could be distinguished from Dominated ones within a given instance and a given relaxation, by using historical labels already obtained for that instance during optimiza-tion. Indeed, one possibility would be to use labels produced at runtime, during the current relaxation, to make an online prediction of the sub-sequent labels. While this is theoretically possible, it introduces several 

21 Test Accuracy Dataset Class Inst. Pareto Dominated Diff. Precision F1 GA 10 0.86 0.86 0.17 0.99 0.92 B 7 0.80 0.83 0.19 0.99 0.89 E 6 0.97 0.84 0.13 1.00 0.91 M 3 0.91 0.89 0.06 1.00 0.94 P 15 0.84 0.85 0.18 0.99 0.91 Overall 41 0.86 0.85 0.16 0.99 0.91 IA 10 0.78 0.72 0.18 0.77 0.73 B 7 0.71 0.78 0.14 0.75 0.76 E 6 0.86 0.63 0.25 0.84 0.69 M 3 0.8 0.69 0.26 0.88 0.77 P 15 0.73 0.8 0.17 0.7 0.73 Overall 41 0.76 0.74 0.18 0.76 0.73 

Table 5: Dataset G and I. Classification results, offline learning. For each experiment, the classifier was trained on all instances except one, that was used for testing. 

algorithmic challenges, such as managing additional computational over-head and understanding how many labels are necessary to train accurate models. Furthermore, there is no guarantee that a set of initial labels will contain enough data to make accurate predictions for the remaining ones. Indeed, preliminary experiments showed that the models performed well only when most of the states had already been generated. In this regard, we note that our models also rely on features that describe the state of the network and data structures at the moment a label is created or inserted. In scenarios where only partial information is available, these features lose much of their value, as they do not capture the full evolution of the search process. In other words, the model lacks access to the complete history of the network exploration. Given the results observed in Analysis 4, we therefore opted for a more operationally sensible scenario: assuming that all labels produced by solving relaxation i are already available, we aim to make informed decisions when addressing the subsequent relaxation i + 1. Specifically, we use the data from relaxation i to train a supervised model and classify labels from iteration i + 1. Indeed, we trained an XGBoost model using labels from the penulti-mate relaxation solved with DSSR-R. We then tested this model on all the completely unseen labels coming from the last relaxation, that is, the iteration of the algorithm that provides an elementary solution. It is worth noting that the last iteration of DSSR-R solves the least relaxed problem, making it the most challenging and time consuming of the al-gorithm. Since all data originated from the same instance, we trained the model using non-normalized records and, given the limited number of labels available in a single iteration, training time was relatively short, averaging, over all instances, 0.79 seconds for Dataset G and 0.11 seconds for Dataset I, making the approach suitable for this online scenario. We report test results in Table 6 for both Dataset I and G. We grouped all test instances by their respective class and, for each group, we reported 

22 the number of instances (Inst.) along with the average accuracy in clas-sifying Pareto and Dominated labels. Additionally, we included the Diff. score, Precision and F1-score. Test Accuracy Dataset Class Inst. Pareto Dominated Diff. Precision F1 GA 10 0.98 0.93 0.06 1.00 0.96 B 7 0.98 0.90 0.08 1.00 0.95 E 6 0.97 0.94 0.06 1.00 0.97 M 3 0.98 0.93 0.05 1.00 0.97 P 15 0.97 0.92 0.05 1.00 0.96 Overall 41 0.98 0.92 0.06 1.00 0.96 IA 10 0.90 0.87 0.04 0.90 0.89 B 7 0.89 0.83 0.06 0.89 0.86 E 6 0.91 0.88 0.03 0.91 0.90 M 3 0.88 0.81 0.07 0.93 0.86 P 15 0.90 0.89 0.06 0.88 0.88 Overall 41 0.90 0.87 0.05 0.89 0.88 

Table 6: Dataset G and I. Classification results, online learning. Model trained on iteration i data, tested on iteration i + 1 records. 

In dataset G, performance is consistently high across all classes. Both Pareto and Dominated labels are classified with high accuracy (above 0.90 in all cases), and the low Diff. values (that range from 0.05 to 0.08) indicate a balanced treatment of both classes. Precision and F1-scores are very strong: overall, this suggests that the classifier performs reliably across all classes in this dataset, with low bias toward one label over the other. Dataset I, while showing lower overall accuracy, demonstrates strong predictive capability. Indeed, instances are classified with high accuracy (on average, above 0.88 balanced accuracy), and although Dominated accuracy is slightly lower, particularly in class M, other classes (like A, E and P) show very balanced performance. The average Diff. is still very low (0.05), reflecting some minor bias toward the Pareto class. Nevertheless, the model achieves good Preci-sion (0.89) and F1-score (0.88), indicating that while predictions are less accurate than in Dataset G, they remain reliable and practically useful. We note that preliminary experiments were also conducted on datasets generated with DSSR (instead of DSSR-R) and they yielded similar re-sults, but with a moderate drop in performance for Dataset I. While the proposed strategy is applicable to any DSSR setup, it is especially effec-tive with DSSR-R, where the similarity between consecutive iterations is higher due to modifications being restricted only to the sets of the nodes involved in cycles. In summary, the classifiers performed very well on both datasets, demonstrating that it is possible to learn online to distinguish between Pareto and Dominated labels when historical label data from previous re-laxations is available. We expect that even better results could be achieved through instance specific tuning during training. 

23 7 Conclusions and future research 

In this paper, we proposed a first exploration of data driven approaches for combinatorial optimization problems, that manage information obtained by dynamic programming states during iterative relaxations optimiza-tion. In particular, we focused on shortest path problems with resource constraints and labeling algorithms, and addressed the possibility of dis-criminating label types, that is Pareto-optimal states from suboptimal ones, looking only at their static properties. To this end, we designed computationally efficient features and stored every label generated from solving all SPPRCLIB instances with a state-of-the-art solver, PathWyse, thus generating two datesets. The former, Dataset G, includes all the generated labels (P,GD,GI), while the latter, Dataset I, collects only labels that have been inserted in data structures (P, GI). That is, suboptimal states, that are discarded at generation by the algorithm, are not saved in Dataset I. We then conducted an exploratory analysis of the main features, con-firming that labeling algorithms prune suboptimal states efficiently. Al-though we found no single strongly correlated feature to distinguish be-tween the states, the distribution of the objective value alone can pro-vide some guidance for dataset G, indicating that the states may still be meaningfully separated. Notably, objective distribution also remains largely consistent across DSSR-R iterations for both datasets, suggest-ing that previously solved relaxations may contain useful information for subsequent ones. We found similar properties with resource consumption. Therefore, we devised a feature normalization strategy based on these insights. Finally, we trained, for each dataset and each instance, an XGBoost model for binary classification of previously unseen labels, using a 1:1 data split, ensuring an equal number of Pareto and dominated labels. First, we simulated offline learning setups, where models were trained using labels from previously solved instances, applying various aggregation strategies. These models were then evaluated on unseen problems and labels. For Dataset G, the predictions showed good accuracy under an all-vs-one policy, though with some bias toward a single class. In contrast, the models struggled to accurately generalize and classify Dataset I labels, highlighting that building more effective models for Dataset I remains an open challenge. Indeed, distinguishing between the subset of Pareto and dominated labels inserted into label pools is significantly more difficult, as these labels are inherently more similar. Next, we examined scenarios simulating online learning, where models are trained using data from the previous relaxation step. These settings yielded strong predictive performance, with approximately 90% balanced accuracy for both Dataset G and Dataset I. This confirms that the model can effectively learn from the label sets produced in the preceding DSSR-R iteration. Still, determining the extent to which these results stem from the models generalization capabilities versus their ability to recognize patterns from previously seen records requires further investigation. Nonetheless, the effectiveness of these methods is well-supported by the results. Overall, our work demonstrates that, on SPPRCLIB, predicting Pareto labels from Dominated ones is feasible, both in an online and offline set-ting, achieving good accuracy even on previously unseen problems. This research provides a first foundation for analyzing dynamic programming 

24 states in combinatorial optimization problems and serves as a starting point for the possible development new algorithms for RCSPP. 

Future research This work opens new avenues for further investiga-tion. First, extending the analysis to a broader range of optimization prob-lems and additional RCSPP instances, including those with more complex and multi-resource profiles, would be valuable. This would naturally re-quire designing new features and metrics to capture the added complexity. Second, it would be interesting to assess the impact of more complex features that cannot be computed in constant time on prediction accu-racy. While a trade-off with computational efficiency is expected, lever-aging dynamic information, potentially obtained through pre-processing or heuristic methods, could enhance classification performance. Lastly, it would be valuable to explore the integration of such predic-tors within the solution process to potentially develop both new heuristic and exact labeling algorithms. This could lead to more efficient strategies for pruning and guiding the search, ultimately improving solution quality and computational performance. 

25 References 

´Edouard Lucas. R´ ecr´ eations math´ ematiques , volume 1. Gauthier-Villars, 1882. Gaston Tarry. Le probleme des labyrinthes. Nouvelles annales de math´ ematiques: journal des candidats aux ´ ecoles polytechnique et nor-male , 14:187–190, 1895. EW Dijkstra. A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Nu-merische Mathematik , 1:269–271, 1959. Alexander Schrijver. On the history of the shortest path problem. Docu-menta Mathematica , 17(1):155–167, 2012. Marco Dorigo. Optimization, learning and natural algorithms. Ph. D. Thesis, Politecnico di Milano , 1992. Yoshua Bengio, Andrea Lodi, and Antoine Prouvost. Machine learning for combinatorial optimization: A methodological tour d’horizon. Eu-ropean Journal of Operational Research , 290(2):405–421, 2021. Giovanni Righini and Matteo Salani. New dynamic programming algo-rithms for the resource constrained elementary shortest path problem. 

Networks , 51(3):155–170, 2008. Amgad Madkour, Walid G. Aref, Faizan Ur Rehman, Mohamed Abdur Rahman, and Saleh M. Basalamah. A survey of shortest-path algo-rithms. CoRR , abs/1705.02044, 2017. Stefan Irnich and Guy Desaulniers. Shortest Path Problems with Resource Constraints , pages 33–65. Springer US, Boston, MA, 2005. ISBN 978-0-387-25486-9. Luigi Di Puglia Pugliese and Francesca Guerriero. A survey of resource constrained shortest path problems: Exact solution approaches. Net-works , 62(3):183–200, 2013. J. E. Beasley and N. Christofides. An algorithm for the resource con-strained shortest path problem. Networks , 19(4):379–394, 1989. W. Matthew Carlyle, Johannes O. Royset, and R. Kevin Wood. La-grangian relaxation and enumeration for solving constrained shortest-path problems. Networks , 52(4):256–270, 2008. Kurt Mehlhorn and Mark Ziegelmann. Resource constrained shortest paths. In Mike S. Paterson, editor, Algorithms - ESA 2000 , pages 326–337, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2000. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. I. Dumitrescu and N. Boland. Improved preprocessing, labeling and scal-ing algorithms for the weight-constrained shortest path problem. Net-works , 42(3):135–153, 2003. Martin Desrochers and Francois Soumis. A generalized permanent la-belling algorithm for the shortest path problem with time windows. 

INFOR: Information Systems and Operational Research , 26(3):191–212, 1988. 

26 Giovanni Righini and Matteo Salani. Symmetry helps: Bounded bi-directional dynamic programming for the elementary shortest path problem with resource constraints. Discrete Optimization , 3(3):255– 273, 2006. Graphs and Combinatorial Optimization. Christian Tilk, Ann-Kathrin Rothenb acher, Timo Gschwind, and Stefan Irnich. Asymmetry matters: Dynamic half-way points in bidirectional labeling for solving shortest path problems with resource constraints faster. European Journal of Operational Research , 261, 03 2017. Diego Pecin, Artur Pessoa, Marcus Poggi, and Eduardo Uchoa. Im-proved branch-cut-and-price for capacitated vehicle routing. Mathe-matical Programming Computation , 9(1):61–100, 2017. Ruslan Sadykov, Eduardo Uchoa, and Artur Pessoa. A bucket graph–based labeling algorithm with application to vehicle routing. 

Transportation Science , 55(1):4–28, 2020. Roberto Baldacci, Aristide Mingozzi, and Roberto Roberti. New route relaxation and pricing strategies for the vehicle routing problem. Op-erations Research , 59(5):1269–1283, 2011. Rafael Martinelli, Diego Pecin, and Marcus Poggi. Efficient elementary and restricted non-elementary route pricing. European Journal of Op-erational Research , 239:102–111, 11 2014. Teobaldo Bulh˜ oes, Ruslan Sadykov, and Eduardo Uchoa. A branch-and-price algorithm for the minimum latency problem. Computers & Op-erations Research , 93:66–78, 2018. Luciano Costa, Claudio Contardo, Guy Desaulniers, and Diego Pecin. Selective arc-ng pricing for vehicle routing. International Transactions in Operational Research , 28(5):2633–2690, 2021. Stefan Irnich and Daniel Villeneuve. The shortest-path problem with resource constraints and k-cycle elimination for k ≥ 3. INFORMS Journal on Computing , 18(3):391–406, 2006. Guy Desaulniers, Fran¸ cois Lessard, and Ahmed Hadjar. Tabu search, partial elementarity, and generalized k-path inequalities for the vehicle routing problem with time windows. Transportation Science , 42(3): 387–404, 2008. Xuan Wu, Di Wang, Lijie Wen, Yubin Xiao, Chunguo Wu, Yuesong Wu, Chaoyu Yu, Douglas L. Maskell, and You Zhou. Neural com-binatorial optimization algorithms for solving vehicle routing prob-lems: A comprehensive survey with perspectives, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.00415 .Reza Shahbazian, Luigi Di Puglia Pugliese, Francesca Guerriero, and Giusy Macrina. Integrating machine learning into vehicle routing prob-lem: Methods and applications. IEEE Access , 12:93087–93115, 2024. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3422479. M. Kruber, M. L¨ ubbecke, and A. Parmentier. Learning when to use a decomposition. In D. Salvagnin and M. Lombardi, editors, Integration of AI and OR Techniques in Constraint Programming , pages 202–210. Springer, May 2017. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 10335. 

27 Sirui Li, Wenbin Ouyang, Max Paulus, and Cathy Wu. Learning to config-ure separators in branch-and-cut. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, editors, Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 60021–60034. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023. Antonia Chmiela, Elias Khalil, Ambros Gleixner, Andrea Lodi, and Sebas-tian Pokutta. Learning to schedule heuristics in branch and bound. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 34, pages 24235–24246. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021. Andrea Lodi and Giulia Zarpellon. On learning and branching: a survey. 

TOP , 25:207–236, 2017. Alejandro Marcos Alvarez, Quentin Louveaux, and Louis Wehenkel. Asupervised machine learning approach to variable branching in branch-and-bound. In IN ECML , 2014. Mouad Morabit, Guy Desaulniers, and Andrea Lodi. Machine-learning–based column selection for column generation. Transportation Science , 55(4):815–831, 2021. Roman V´ aclav´ ık, Anton´ ın Nov´ ak, Pˇ remysl ˇS˚ ucha, and Zdenˇ ek Hanz´ alek. Accelerating the Branch-and-Price Algorithm Using Machine Learning. 

European Journal of Operational Research , 271(3):1055–1069, 2018. Mouad Morabit, Guy Desaulniers, and Andrea Lodi. Machine-learning– based arc selection for constrained shortest path problems in column generation. INFORMS Journal on Optimization , 5(2):191–210, 2023. Kuan Xu, Li Shen, and Lindong Liu. Enhancing column generation by reinforcement learning-based hyper-heuristic for vehicle routing and scheduling problems. Computers & Industrial Engineering , 206:111138, 2025. ISSN 0360-8352. Mouad Morabit, Guy Desaulniers, and Andrea Lodi. Learning to repeat-edly solve routing problems. Networks , 83(3):503–526, 2024. Cristina Ondei, Alberto Ceselli, and Marco Trubian. Data-driven feasi-bility for the resource constrained shortest path problem check for up-dates. Graphs and Combinatorial Optimization: From Theory to Appli-cations: CTW 2023, Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, June 20-22 ,13:135, 2024. G. Righini and Matteo Salani. Decremental state space relaxation strate-gies and initialization heuristics for solving the orienteering problem with time windows with dynamic programming. Computers & Opera-tions Research , 36(4):1191–1203, 2009. SPPRCLIB. http://hjemmesider.diku.dk/ spooren/spprclib.htm .2008. [Online; accessed 25-Jul-2025]. Eduardo Uchoa, Diego Pecin, Artur Pessoa, Marcus Poggi, Thibaut Vidal, and Anand Subramanian. New benchmark instances for the capacitated vehicle routing problem. European Journal of Operational Research , 257 (3):845–858, 2017. ISSN 0377-2217. 

28 Matteo Salani, Saverio Basso, and Vincenzo Giuffrida. Pathwyse: a flexi-ble, open-source library for the resource constrained shortest path prob-lem. Optimization Methods and Software , 39(2):298–320, 2024a. Matteo Salani, Saverio Basso, and Giovanni Righini. Enhanced bi-directional dynamic programming algorithm for the resource con-strained shortest path problem. Transportation Research Procedia , 78: 361–368, 2024b. ISSN 2352-1465. 

29 A Appendix 

# A.1 Instances of the Dataset 

Class A 

• A-n54-k7, A-n60-k9, A-n61-k9, A-n62-k8, A-n63-k9, A-n63-k10,A-n64-k9, A-n65-k9, A-n69-k9, A-n80-k10 Class B 

• B-n45-k6, B-n50-k8, B-n52-k7, B-n66-k9, B-n67-k10, B-n68-k9, B-n78-k10 Class E 

• E-n76-k7, E-n76-k10, E-n76-k14, E-n76-k15, E-n101-k8, E-n101-k14 Class M 

• M-n101-k10, M-n151-k12, M-n200-k17 Class P 

• P-n50-k7, P-n50-k8, P-n50-k10, P-n51-k10, P-n55-k10, P-n55-k15, P-n55-k7, P-n55-k8, P-n60-k10, P-n60-k15, P-n65-k10, P-n70-k10, P-n76-k4, P-n76-k5, P-n101-k4 

# A.2 Features of the Dataset 

For each label generated by the optimization algorithm, we collected the following characteristics. We note that all information is computed in constant time, that is, during the execution of the algorithm, we do not perform additional computations to access data, whenever a label is cre-ated. In the following, we mark with an asterisk the features that are used to train supervised models in Section 6. 

Algorithm Features 

• executionID 

• iteration For each label, we keep track the ID of the test (executionID) and the iteration of the DSSR-R relaxation that generated it (iteration). 

General features 

• direction 

• node 

• predecessor 

• objective* 

• consumption critical* 

• efficiency* 

• dominated We also record if the label was generated with a forward or back-ward search (direction), the currently reached node (node), its prede-cessor (precedessor), the total cumulative objective and consumption of critical resource of the partial path (respectively, objective and consump-tion critical). A custom efficiency metric (efficiency), that we defined in section 5.1. Finally, we also record if a label is dominated or not. That is, dominated labels are marked with 1 and Pareto labels are marked with 0. 

Tour-related features 

30 • tour length* 

• nvisited* 

• nvisited unaltered* 

• nunreachable* 

• nunreachable unaltered* 

• repeated visits* 

• visited 

• visited unaltered 

• unreachable We then record features related to the nodes visited by the partial path. These include the tour length, the number of loops in the path (repeated visits), and both the number of visited (nvisited) and unreach-able (nunreachable) nodes, as determined by the current DSSR-R sets. In addition, we store unmodified versions of these features, that is, the actual counts of visited and unreachable nodes that would result without any relaxation. Finally, we initially save the full bitsets representing the visited and unreachable nodes. 

Network Status Features 

• nlabels network* 

• nlabels dominated network* 

• nlabels closed network* 

• nlabels open network* 

• nlabels node* 

• nlabels closed node* 

• nlabels open node* The final set of features we monitor captures the state of the network at the moment each label is generated by the algorithm. Specifically, we record the total number of labels in the network (nlabels network), dis-tinguishing between open, closed, and dominated labels. Additionally, for each label, we track the total number of labels in the corresponding node data pool (nlabels node), separately identifying open and closed labels. We remark that these features are specific for the direction of the search (i.e. forward or backward). 

# A.3 Validation Results 

We report in Table 7 the validation results for the classifiers discussed in Section 6. For both offline and online tests and each dataset we report the overall accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score. For offline experiments, we also report the training strategy that was adopted. 

# A.4 Alternative aggregation strategies for offline learning 

Several alternative aggregation strategies were explored during prelimi-nary experiments. First, we tested a random-split approach, where one third of the in-stances were selected at random for training, and the remaining ones were used for testing. This process was repeated multiple times. While this strategy generally outperformed the one-vs-all setup, it underperformed compared to the all-vs-one approach. Moreover, due to the randomized selection, results were highly inconsistent. Next, we explored class-based aggregation. Since instances within the same class share structural characteristics, such as node distributions and value patterns, we tested whether a model trained on a subset of instances 

31 Test Strategy Dataset Accuracy Precision Recall F1 Offline one-vs-all G 0.92 1.00 0.92 0.96 I 0.83 0.79 0.82 0.79 all-but-one G 0.91 1.00 0.91 0.95 I 0.79 0.88 0.76 0.82 Online G 0.92 1.00 0.92 0.96 I 0.83 0.79 0.82 0.80 Table 7: Validation results for every experiment, for models trained on Dataset G and I. 

from a given class could effectively predict other instances from the same class. However, results showed that such models were, on average, quite inaccurate. We also experimented with cross-class predictions: using a model trained on one class to predict instances from other classes. Interestingly, this approach led to better average performance across both datasets com-pared to the one-vs-all strategy. Nonetheless, some models (notably those trained on classes E and M) displayed a strong bias toward one class. Indeed, these two models require further tuning: better results might be obtained calibrating the Pareto and Dominated labels split used during training, for each instance. In summary, the models were unable to generalize within the same class. However, as demonstrated by the all-but-one strategy, training on a diverse set of instances, including those from different classes, improves predictive performance. 

32